THE ILIAD.




THE QUARREL OF AGAMEMNON AND ACHILLES.


Adopting for himself a method which has since become a rule of art, more
or less acknowledged in the literature of fiction, the poet dashes off
at once into the full action of his story. He does not ask his readers
or hearers to accompany the great armament over sea from the shores of
Greece, or give them the history of the long and weary siege. He plunges
at one leap into the tenth year of the war. He assumes from the outset,
on the part of those to whom he speaks, a general knowledge of the main
plot of his poem, and of the characters represented: just as the modern
author of a novel or a poem on the Civil Wars of England would assume
some general acquaintance with the history of Charles I., the character
of Cromwell, and the breach between King and Commons. Nine whole years
are supposed to have already passed in desultory warfare; but for the
details of these campaigns the modern reader has to go to other sources,
with which also the original hearers are supposed to have been
acquainted. The Trojans and their allies are cooped up within the walls
of their city, while the Greek hero Achilles has spread the terror of
his name far and wide.

The poet’s exordium is of the very briefest. His invocation to the
goddess of song is in just three words:--

    “Sing, heavenly muse, the wrath of Peleus’ son.”

We have here the key-note of the poem brought before us in the very
first line--nay, in the very first word, according to the original, for
“wrath” stands first in the Greek, which it cannot very conveniently do
in the English. The two great heroes of the Greek chivalry, Agamemnon
and Achilles, always jealous of each other, come to an open quarrel in
full council of the princes of the League. Their quarrel is--like the
original cause of the war, like so many quarrels before and since--about
a woman, a beautiful captive. A fatal pestilence is raging in the camp.
The Sun-god, Apollo, is angry. To him and to his twin-sister Diana, the
Moon, all mysterious diseases were attributed--not without some
sufficient reasons, in a hot climate. Pestilence and disease were the
arrows of Apollo and Diana. Therefore the Greeks have no doubt as to the
author of the present calamity. It is “the god of the silver bow” who is
sending his swift shafts of death amongst them. The poet’s vision even
sees the dread Archer in bodily shape. It is a fine picture; the English
reader will lose little of its beauty in Lord Derby’s version:--

    “Along Olympus’ heights he passed, his heart
     Burning with wrath; behind his shoulders hung
     His bow and ample quiver; at his back
     Rattled the fateful arrows as he moved.
     Like the night-cloud he passed, and from afar
     He bent against the ships, and sped the bolt;
     And fierce and deadly twanged the silver bow.
     First on the mules and dogs, on man the last,
     Was poured the arrowy storm; and through the camp
     Constant and numerous blazed the funeral-fires.”

In their misery the Greeks appeal to their soothsayer Calchas, to divine
for them the cause of the god’s displeasure. The Mantis or soothsayer,
whose skill was in most cases supposed to be hereditary, accompanied a
Greek force on all its expeditions; and no prudent general would risk a
battle, or engage in any important enterprise, without first
ascertaining from this authority the will of the gods, as shadowed out
in certain appearances of the sacrifice, or some peculiarity in the
flight of birds, or some phenomena of the heavens. In this particular
expedition it would appear that Calchas had turned the last branch of
his art to good purpose; it must have been his knowledge of the stars
which had enabled him, as Homer tells us, to pilot the great fleet from
their own shores to Troy. He confesses that he can read the secret of
Apollo’s present wrath; but he hesitates to tell it, dreading, he says,
lest he should thereby anger the “great chief whom the whole host
obeys.” Achilles charges him to speak out boldly without fear or favour;
none shall harm him--not even if he should denounce Agamemnon himself as
the cause of this visitation, adds the hero, gladly seizing the
opportunity of hurling a defiance at his great rival. Thus supported,
the seer speaks out; Agamemnon is indeed the guilty cause. In a late
foray he had taken captive the maiden daughter of Chryses, a priest of
the Sun-god, and the father had come to the camp of the invaders as a
suppliant, pleading the sanctity of his office, and offering a fitting
ransom. The great king had refused to listen, had sent him away with
bitter words and threats; and the priest had prayed to his god to punish
the insult: hence the pestilence. Immediately the popular
voice--expressed loudly through Achilles--demands the maiden’s instant
restitution to her father. Agamemnon, though burning with indignation
alike against the seer and his champion, dares not refuse. His
prerogative, however generally admitted and respected by the confederate
army, is dependent in such extremities on the popular will. He promises
at once to send back the daughter of Chryses unharmed and without
ransom. But at the same time, after a stormy and bitter dispute with
Achilles, he announces his intention to insist on that chief resigning,
by way of exchange, a fair captive named Briseis, carried off in some
similar raid, who had been awarded to him as his share of the public
spoil. To this insolent demand the majority of the council of chiefs,
content with their victory on the main question, appear to raise no
objection. But Achilles--his impetuous nature roused to madness by the
studied insult--leaps up and half unsheathes his sword. Even then--such
is the Greek’s reverence for authority--he hesitates; and as he stands
with his hand upon the hilt, there sweeps down from Olympus[10] Pallas
Athene (Minerva), the goddess of wisdom, sent by Here (Juno) Queen of
Heaven to check this fatal strife between her favourite Greeks. The
celestial messenger is visible to Achilles alone. She calms the hero’s
wrath so far as to restrain him from any act of violence; but, as she
disappears, he turns on his enemy, and swears a mighty oath--the royal
oath of kings--by the golden-studded staff, or “sceptre,” which was
borne by king, priest, and judge as the emblem of their authority.
Pope’s rendering has all the fire of the original, and the additional
touches which he throws in are at least in a kindred spirit:--

    “By this I swear, when bleeding Greece again
     Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain:
     When flushed with slaughter Hector comes to spread
     The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
     Then shalt thou mourn th’ affront thy madness gave,
     Forced to deplore, when impotent to save;
     Then rage in bitterness of soul, to know
     This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe.”

He dashes his sceptre on the ground, and sits down in savage silence.
Agamemnon is ready enough to return the taunt, when there rises in the
assembly a venerable figure, whose grey hairs and tried sagacity in
council command at once the respect of all. It is Nestor, the
hoary-headed chieftain of the rocky Pylos in the Peloponnese--known in
his more vigorous days as “the horse-tamer,” and, in sooth, not a little
proud of his past exploits. Two generations of men he has already
outlived in his own dominions, and is now loved and respected by the
third. He has joined the great armament still sound in wind and limb;
but he is valued now not so much for his

    “Red hand in the foray,”

as for his

    “Sage counsel in cumber.”

He can clothe this counsel, too, in winning words. The stream of
eloquence that flowed from his lips, says the poet, was “sweeter than
honey.” He gently reproves both disputants for their unseemly strife--a
shame to the Greeks, a triumph to the enemy. His words ring like the
lament of David over the suicide of Saul--“Tell it not in Gath, publish
it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice.”

    “Alas, deep sorrow on our land doth fall!
     Yet shall on Priam and his sons alight
     Hope, and a great joy on the Trojans all,
     Hearing ye waste in bitter feud your might,
     Ye twain, our best in counsel and in fight.” (W.)

He proceeds to tell them something of his own long experience, by way of
claim on their attention--with something also, as critics have noticed,
of an old man’s garrulity. But the reader, it should be remembered,
really wants to know something about him, even if the Greeks may have
been supposed to have heard his story before.

                          “In times past
    I lived with men--and they despised me not--
    Abler in counsel, greater than yourselves.
    Such men I never saw and ne’er shall see,
    As Pirithous and Dryas, wise and brave,
    And Theseus, Œgeus’ more than mortal son.
    The mightiest they among the sons of men,
    The mightiest they, and of the forest beasts
    Strove with the mightiest, and their rage subdued.
    With them I played my part; with them, not one
    Would dare to fight of mortals now on earth.
    Yet they my counsels heard, my voice obeyed;
    And hear ye also--for my words are wise.” (D.)

The angry chiefs do hear him so far, that after the interchange of a few
more passionate words they leave the council. Achilles stalks off
gloomily to his tent, accompanied by his faithful friend and henchman,
Patroclus (of whom we shall hear more), and followed by his retinue.
Agamemnon proceeds at once to carry out his resolution. He despatches a
galley with a trusty crew, under the command of the sage Ulysses, to the
island of Chrysa, to restore the old priest’s daughter to him in all
honour, with expiatory presents, and the offer of a hecatomb to the
Sun-god. They make the voyage quickly, and arrive safely at the island.
The rapid movement here of Homer’s verse has rarely been more happily
rendered than in the English hexameters of Mr Landon:--

    “Out were the anchors cast, and the ropes made fast to the steerage;
     Out did the sailors leap on the foaming beach of the ocean;
     Out was the hecatomb led for the skilful marksman Apollo;
     Out Chryseis arose from the ship that sped through the waters.”

So, by the good priest’s prayers, the god is propitiated, and the plague
in the Greek host is stayed.

Meanwhile another embassy, on a very different errand, has been
despatched by the King of Men to the tents where Achilles lies, hard by
his ships, with his fierce bands of Myrmidons encamped around him. Their
name has passed into a by-word, being commonly but incorrectly used to
designate an unscrupulous rabble of followers, to whom their leader’s
word is law. The notion must be derived not from Homer, but from Pope.
In his version of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles, he makes
the former say to his antagonist--

    “Go, threat thine earth-born Myrmidons; but here
     ’Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.”

But to suppose that the Myrmidons were subservient to any man’s threats,
is to give them a very different character from what we find in Homer.
Even the epithet “earth-born,” which is Pope’s, not Homer’s, and which
may easily be misunderstood, they would have prized as a high
compliment, implying that they were no new race, but the aboriginal
possessors of their native soil; just as the proud Athenians wore the
“golden grasshopper” in their hair, because that insect was fabled to
owe its birth to the spontaneous action of the earth. The followers of
Achilles were indeed “fierce as ravening wolves,” as the poet has
afterwards described them; but they were the very flower of the Greek
army, troops of whom any leader might be proud, and if they had a
wolfish thirst for blood, they were no worse and no better in this
respect than Achilles himself, or any captain in the host before Troy;
for an insatiable ferocity, when once the spirit of combativeness is
aroused, is the characteristic of all Homer’s heroes, as in those of the
medieval romances.

The purpose of the king’s embassy to Achilles is, of course, in
pursuance of his threat, to demand the surrender of the fair Briseis.
Such a message to such a man is no very safe or agreeable errand. But
Agamemnon chooses his envoys well. He sends two heralds--Eurybates and
Talthybius. The herald’s office, in early Greek warfare, had an especial
sanctity. Those who held it were not mere officials whose name protected
them, but men of noble and even of royal birth, who might have been
captains of thousands themselves, if they had not chosen, as it were,
the civilian’s place in warfare. Such diplomacy as there was room for
in those ages was transacted by them. They were under the special
protection of Zeus, as the god of oaths and treaties. There was no fear
that the noble chief of the Myrmidons, even in his most furious mood,
would treat such envoys rudely. But in fact his reception of them is one
of the most remarkable scenes in the poem, both from its high-toned
courtesy and from its strong contrast with the hero’s previous bearing
towards Agamemnon. Achilles receives the heralds of the king much as a
well-bred gentleman of fifty years ago would have received the “friend”
who carried a hostile message from one with whom he had a deadly quarrel
a few hours before. The demand which they brought from Agamemnon was
pointed with the additional threat that, if he refused to give up the
damsel, the king would come himself and carry her off by the strong
hand,--a threat almost brutal, because quite unwarranted; since Achilles
had declared in the council that if the Greeks, who had awarded her as
his battle-prize, chose to acquiesce in the injustice of demanding her
back from him, _he_ should make no resistance. But it does not seem that
the heralds delivered themselves of the additional insult which they
were charged to convey. They had no need. As they stand at the entrance
of his tent, “troubled and awe-stricken,” loath to begin their unwelcome
tale, Achilles sets them at their ease at once in a few calm and
dignified words. He recognises in them “the messengers of Zeus”--and if
now by accident of Agamemnon, the offence is his, not theirs. He at once
bids Patroclus lead forth the damsel, and gives her into their custody,
to deal with according to their orders. He repeats his oath, however,
though in calmer terms; and calls them to witness before heaven that
Agamemnon, in his day of need, shall look in vain for the saving arm of
the man he has insulted.

It is something in favour of a tender side to the hero’s character, that
the “fair-cheeked” Briseis, spoil of war though she was, parts from him
very reluctantly. Achilles, for his share, fairly weeps: but not the
most romantic reader of the story dares nurse the idea that it is for
his Briseis. They who bring with them, to the pages of classical
fiction, a taste which has been built up by modern song and romance,
must be warned at once that there is no love-story in either Iliad or
Odyssey. Indeed, one remarkable point of difference between the
imaginative writers of antiquity and those of our own days, lies in the
absence of that which is the motive and the key-note of five-sixths of
our modern tales in prose and verse. Love between unmarried persons, in
the sense in which we commonly use the word, seems very much the product
of modern civilisation. There is indeed a passion which we name by the
same English word--the mere animal passion, which Homer, to do him
justice, deals with but as a matter of fact, and never paints in
attractive colours. There is again a love of another kind--the love of
the husband for his wife and of the wife for her husband--which the old
poet also well understood, and which furnishes him with scenes of the
highest pathos and beauty. But as to the sentiment which forms the
common staple of modern romance and drama, Homer certainly did not know
what it meant, nor Achilles or Briseis either. As for the latter, if she
shed tears, it was no doubt because she had found in Achilles a kind
and generous lord and master, who had made her captive lot (which might
chance to come to the turn of any lady or princess in those warlike
times) as tolerable as such a life could be; and because Agamemnon--if
she had heard his character from Achilles--did not promise a very
favourable change in that respect.

Achilles weeps--but not for Briseis. He is touched in a point where he
is far more sensitive--his honour. He has been robbed of the guerdon of
valour, bestowed on him in full conclave of the chiefs of the army. He
has been robbed of it by Agamemnon--the man for whose especial sake, to
avenge whose family wrongs, he has come on this long expedition from his
home. This was his indignant protest in their dispute at the council--

    “Well dost thou know that ’twas no feud of mine
     With Troy’s brave sons, that brought me here in arms;
     They never did me wrong; they never drove
     My cattle, or my horses; never sought
     In Phthia’s fertile life-sustaining fields
     To waste the crops; for wide between us lay
     The shadowy mountains and the roaring sea.
     With thee, O void of shame! with thee we sailed,
     For Menelaüs and for thee, ingrate,
     Glory and fame on Trojan crests to win.” (D.)

And now this is his reward! And the whole Greek army, too, have made
themselves partakers in the wrong, inasmuch as they have tamely looked
on, and allowed the haughty king thus to override honour, gratitude, and
justice. His indignation is intense. He wanders away, and sits alone on
the sea-beach, “gazing vacantly on the illimitable ocean.” Soon there
comes a change upon his spirit; and now, with a childlike
petulance--these Homeric heroes, with all their fierce ways, are still
so very childlike, and therefore so human and so interesting--he cries
to his mother. True, that mother is, as we remember, a goddess--Thetis,
daughter of the great Jupiter, and of potent influence in the waters
beneath the earth. To her he bemoans himself. That his days were to be
few, he knew when he came here to Troy; but she had promised him undying
renown. It has failed him: his “one crowded hour of glorious life” is
darkened in dishonour. He cries, and his goddess-mother hears him--

    “Beside her aged father where she sat,
     In the deep ocean-caves.”

It is the original of our own Milton’s beautiful invocation in
Comus--the rough simple outline on which he has painted with a grace and
fulness which make it all his own--

    “Sabrina fair!
       Listen, where thou art sitting
     Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave,
       In twisted braids of lilies knitting
     The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair;
       Listen for dear honour’s sake,
       Goddess of the silver lake,
                 Listen, and save!”

Thetis hears, and rises on the sea--“like as it were a mist”--(the
“White Lady of Avenel”) caresses him soothingly with her hand, as though
the stalwart warrior were still a child indeed, and asks him the simple
question which all mothers, goddesses or not, would put into much the
same words--“My son, why weepest thou?” He tells his tale of wrong; and
she proceeds to give him, in the first place, advice certainly not wiser
than that of some earthly mothers. She does not advise him to make up
his quarrel with Agamemnon, but to nurse his wrath, and withdraw
himself wholly from the siege. She, meanwhile, will intercede with
Jupiter, and beseech him to grant the Trojans victory for a while, that
so the Greeks may learn to feel the loss of the hero whom they have
insulted.

There is an obstacle, however, in the way of the immediate performance
of her promise--a ludicrous obstacle, to our modern taste, though the
poet does not so intend it. The King of the Gods has gone out to
dinner--or rather to a continuous festival of twelve days, to which he
has been invited by “the blameless Ethiopians;”[11] a race with whom the
Immortals of Olympus have some mysterious connection, which has been
held to imply an Eastern origin for the Greek religion and race. With
the dawn of the twelfth morning, however, Thetis presents herself in the
“brazen-floored” halls of Jupiter, and we are introduced to the Olympian
court and household. A strange picture it is--such a travesty of a
divine life as makes us wonder what the poet himself really conceived of
the gods of his adoption. The life of mortal heroes in the world below
is grandeur and nobleness itself compared with that of the Olympian
heaven. Its pleasures indeed are much the same--those of sensual
gratification; the feast, the wine-cup, music and song, are what gods
and goddesses delight in as much as those whom the poet pathetically
calls “the creatures of a day.” But all their passions are incomparably
meaner. The wrath of Achilles is dignified--Juno’s anger against Troy
is mere vicious spite. The subtle craft of Ulysses is at least exercised
for the benefit of his countrymen and their cause; but the shifty
counsels of Jupiter are the mere expedients of a cunning despot who,
between queen and ministers and favourites, finds it difficult, in spite
of his despotism, to have his own way. The quarrel between Agamemnon and
Achilles is tragedy: the domestic wrangles of the Thunderer and his
queen are in the very spirit of low comedy, and not even the burlesques
of Life in Olympus, which some years ago were popular on our English
stage, went far beyond the recognised legends of mythology. In fact, the
comic element, what little there is of it in the Iliad, is supplied
(with the single exception of the incident of Thersites) by the powers
whom the poet recognises as divinities. The idea of rival wills and
influences existing in the supernatural world led the poet necessarily
to represent his gods as quarrelling; and quarrels in a primitive age
are perhaps hardly compatible with dignity. But the conception of gods
in human shape has always a tendency to monstrosities and caricature.
How close, too, the supernatural and the grotesque seem to lie together
may be seen even in the existing sculptures and carvings of ancient
Christendom, and still more remarkably in the old Miracle-Plays, which
mix buffoonery with the most sacred subjects in a manner which it is
hard to reconcile with any real feeling of reverence.

Thetis throws herself at the feet of her father Jupiter, and begs of
him, as a personal favour, the temporary humiliation of Agamemnon and
his Greeks. For a while the Thunderer is silent, and hesitates; Thetis
perseveringly clings to his knees. At last he confides to her his dread
lest a compliance with her petition should involve him in domestic
difficulties.

    “Sad work thou mak’st, in bidding me oppose
     My will to Juno’s, when her bitter words
     Assail me, for full oft amid the gods
     She taunts me that I aid the Trojan cause.
     But thou return--_that Juno see thee not_--
     And leave to me the furtherance of thy suit.” (D.)

He pledges his promise to her, and ratifies it with the mighty nod that
shakes Olympus--a solemn confirmation which made his word irrevocable.

    “Waved on th’ immortal head th’ ambrosial locks,
     And all Olympus trembled at his nod.”

Critics have somewhat over-praised the grandeur of the image; but it is
said that the great sculptor Phidias referred to it as having furnished
him with the idea of his noble statue of Olympian Jove. Satisfied with
her success, Thetis plunges down from high Olympus into the sea, and the
Thunderer proceeds to take his place in full council of the gods, as
calm as if nothing had happened. But there are watchful eyes about him
which he has not escaped. Juno has been a witness of the interview, and
has a shrewd suspicion of its object. A connubial dialogue ensues,
which, though the poet has thought fit to transfer the scene of it to
Olympus, is of an exceedingly earthly, and what we should now call
“realistic,” type. Homer’s recognised translators have not condescended
to give it the homely tone of the original. Pope is grandiloquent, and
Lord Derby calmly dignified; but Homer intends to be neither. Mr
Gladstone’s translation comes nearest the spirit of the Greek. The
brief encounter between the king and queen of the Immortals is cut short
by the former in rather summary fashion. “Thou hast been promising
honour to Achilles, I trow,” says Juno.

    “Zeus that rolls the clouds of heaven her addressing answered then;
     ‘Moonstruck! thou art ever _trowing_; never I escape thy ken.
     After all, it boots thee nothing; leaves thee of my heart the less:
     So thou hast the worser bargain. What if I the fact confess?
     It was done because I willed it. Hold thy peace--my word obey,
     Lest, if I come near, and on thee these unconquered hands I lay,
     All the gods that hold Olympus nought avail thee here to-day.’”[12]

He bids her, in very plain Greek, sit down and hold her tongue; and
gives her clearly to understand--with a threat of violence which is an
unusual addition to his many failings as a husband--that it is his fixed
intention, on this occasion, to be lord and master, not only of Olympus,
but of his wife. Juno is silenced, and the whole assembly of the gods is
startled by the Thunderer’s violence. Vulcan, the fire-god--the lame
brawny hunchback, always more or less the jester and the butt of the
court of Olympus, but with more brains in his head than most of his
straight-limbed compeers--Vulcan comes to the general relief. He soothes
his royal mother by the argument, that it were ill indeed to break the
peace of heaven for the sake of two or three wretched mortals: and he
reminds her--we must suppose in an aside--that they both knew by bitter
experience that when the father of gods and men _did_ choose to put
forth his might, it went hard with all who resisted.

    “When to thy succour once before I came,
     He seized me by the foot, and hurled me down
     From heaven’s high threshold; all the day I fell,
     And with the setting sun on Lemnos’ isle
     Lighted, scarce half-alive; there was I found,
     And by the Sintian people kindly nursed.” (D.)

He gives the mother-goddess further comfort--in “a double cup,” which he
proceeds also to hand round the whole of the august circle. They quaff
their nectar with unusual zest, as they break into peals of laughter (it
must be confessed, rather ungratefully) at the hobbling gait and awkward
attentions of their new cup-bearer:--

    “Thus they till sunset passed the festive hours;
     Nor lacked the banquet aught to please the sense,
     Nor sound of tuneful lyre by Phœbus touched,
     Nor Muses’ voice, who in alternate strains
     Responsive sung; but when the sun had set
     Each to his home departed, where for each
     The crippled Vulcan, matchless architect,
     With wondrous skill a noble house had reared.”

And so, at the end of the first book of the poem, the curtain falls on
the Olympian happy family.

But Jupiter has but a wakeful night. He is planning how he may best
carry out his promise to Thetis. He sends a lying spirit in a dream to
Agamemnon at midnight. The vision stands at the head of the king’s
couch, taking the shape of old Nestor. In this character it encourages
him to muster all his forces to storm the city of Troy on the morrow.
Now, at last, the false phantom assures him, its walls are doomed to
fall; the strife in heaven is ended; Juno’s counsels have prevailed, and
the fate of Troy is sealed irrevocably.

Joyfully the King of Men arises from his sleep, and summons at daybreak
a council of the chiefs. Already, says the poet, he storms and sacks the
royal city in imagination, little foreseeing the long and bloody
struggle that lies yet between him and his prey. In the council he
invents a stratagem of his own, which complicates the story considerably
without improving it. He suspects the temper of his army; and before he
makes up his mind to lead them to the assault, he seeks to ascertain
whether or no the long ten years’ siege has worn out their patience and
broken their spirit. He will try the dangerous experiment of proposing
to them to break up the siege and embark at once for home. He himself
will make the proposal to the whole army; the other leaders, for their
part, are to oppose such a base retreat, and urge their followers to
make yet another effort for the national honour of Greece.

The clans, at the summons of their several chiefs, muster in their
thousands from tents and ships; and Agamemnon, seated on his throne of
state, the immortal sceptre in his hand, harangues them in accordance
with his preconcerted stratagem. He paints in lively colours the
weariness of the nine years’ siege, his own disappointed hopes, the
painful yearning of their long-deserted wives and children for the
return of their husbands and fathers; and ends by proposing an immediate
re-embarkation for home. He plays his part only too successfully. The
immense host heaves and sways with excitement at his words--“like the
long waves of the Icarian Sea, like the deep tall corn-crop as the
summer wind sweeps over it”--and with tumultuous shouts of exultation
they rush down to their galleys and begin at once to launch them; so
little regard have the multitude for glory, so strong is their yearning
for home. It is possible that the poet is no unconscious satirist, and
that he willingly allowed his hearers to draw, if they pleased, the
inference which he hints in more than one passage, that war is the sport
of princes, for which the masses pay the cost.

But Juno’s ever-watchful eyes have marked the movement. Again Minerva is
her messenger, and shoots down from Olympus to stop this disgraceful
flight. She addresses herself to the ear of the sage Ulysses, who knows
her voice at once. Wisdom speaks to the wise,--if any reader prefers the
moral allegory to the simple fiction. Ulysses is standing fixed in
disgust and despair at the cowardice of his countrymen. The goddess bids
him use all his eloquence to check their flight. Without a word he
flings off his cloak,[13] and meeting Agamemnon, receives the immortal
sceptre from his hand, and armed with this staff of authority rushes
down to the galleys. Any king or chieftain whom he encounters he hastily
reminds of the secret understanding which had been the result of the
previous council, and urges them, at least, to set a braver example. To
the plebeian crowd he uses argument of another kind. He applies the
royal sceptre to them in one of its primitive uses, as a rod of
correction, and bids them wait for orders from their superiors. Easily
swayed to either course, the crowd are awed into quiet by his energetic
remonstrances. One popular orator alone lifts his well-known voice
loudly in defiance. It is a certain Thersites, of whom the poet gives a
sketch, brief enough, but with so many marks of individuality, that we
may be justified in looking at him as a character drawn from life.

    “The ugliest man was he who came to Troy,
     With squinting eyes and one distorted foot,
     His shoulders round, and buried in his breast
     His narrow head with scanty growth of hair.”

His talent lies in speaking evil of dignities--a talent which, no doubt,
he had found popular enough in some circles of camp society, though all
the respectable Greeks, we are assured, are shocked at him. He launches
out now with bitter virulence--in which there is nevertheless (as in
most oratory of the kind) a certain amount of truth--against Agamemnon.
He denounces his greed, his selfishness, his disregard of the sufferings
of his troops, his late treatment of Achilles; they must all be cowards,
he says, to obey such a leader--

    “Women of Greece! I will not call ye men!”

Why not sail home at once, and leave him, if he can, to take Troy with
his own single hand?

The mutineer speaks in an evil hour for himself, this time; for Ulysses
hears him. That energetic chief answers him in terms as strong as his
own, and warns him that if he should catch him again railing in like
fashion--“taking the name of kings in his abusive mouth”--he will strip
his garments from him, and flog him naked back to the ships. And, as an
earnest of his promise, he lays the mighty sceptre heavily on his back
and shoulders. Such prompt and vigorous chastisement meets the popular
humour at once; and as the hunchback writhes and howls under the blows,
the fickle feelings of the Greeks break forth in peals of laughter. “Of
the many good things Ulysses has done, this last,” they swear, “is the
best of all.”

Then, prompted still by the goddess of Wisdom, Ulysses harangues the
reassembled troops. He reminds them of their plighted oath of service to
Agamemnon, of the encouraging oracles of heaven, of the disgrace of
returning home from an unaccomplished errand. With the art of a true
orator, he sympathises with their late feelings--it _is_ bitter for them
all, indeed, to waste so many years on a foreign shore, far from home,
and wife, and children; but bitterest of all would it be

    “Long to remain, and bootless to return.”

The venerable Nestor speaks to the same effect; and Agamemnon himself
closes the debate with a call to immediate battle. It is a right royal
speech, far more worthy of a true “king of men” than his former
philippics--moderate in his allusion to Achilles, spirited in his appeal
to his warriors.

       “Come but new friendship, and our feud destroy,
        Then from the evil that is fixed and sealed
        Not one day’s respite shall be left to Troy--
        But now to dinner, ere we take the field;
        Let each his spear whet, and prepare his shield,
        Feed well the horses, and each chariot test,
        That we may fight it out till one side yield,
        Fight in sound harness, and not think of rest,
    Till the black night decide it as to Zeus seems best.

       “Then shall the horses in their foam be wet,
        While forward in the glittering car they strain;
        Then shall the straps of the broad buckler sweat
        Round many a breast there battling in the plain;
        Then shall the arm droop, hurling spears with pain:
        And whomsoever I behold at lair
        Here by the ships, and for the fight not fain,
        Small for that skulker is the hope, I swear,
    But that the dogs he fatten and the fowls of air.” (W.)

He remembers, too, like a wise general, that a battle may be lost by
fighting on an empty stomach. So the oxen and the fatlings are slain,
the choice pieces of the thighs and the fat are offered in sacrifice to
the gods, and then the whole army feasts their fill. Agamemnon holds a
select banquet of six of the chief leaders--King Idomeneus of Crete,
Nestor, Ajax the Greater and the Less, and Ulysses, “wise in council as
Zeus.” One guest comes uninvited--his brother Menelaus. He is no
dinner-loving intruder; he comes, as the poet simply tells us, “because
he knew in his heart how many were his brother’s cares and
anxieties,”--he might be of some use or support to him. Throughout the
whole of the poem, the mutual affection borne by these two brothers is
very remarkable, and unlike any type of the same relationship which
exists in fiction. It is never put forward or specially dwelt upon, but
comes out simply and naturally in every particular of their intercourse.

A king and priest, like Abraham at Bethel, Agamemnon stands by his
burnt-offering, and lifts his prayer for victory to Jupiter, “most
glorious and most great, who dwells in the clouds and thick darkness.”
But no favourable omen comes from heaven. The god, whether or no he
accepts the offering, gives no sign. Nevertheless--we may suppose with a
certain wilfulness which is part of his character--Agamemnon proceeds to
set the battle in array; and the second book of the Iliad closes with
the long muster-roll of the Greek clans under their respective kings or
chiefs on the one side, and of the Trojans and their allies on the
other, which in our introduction has already been partly
anticipated.[14] The long list of chiefs, with their genealogies and
birthplaces, and the strength of their several contingents, was
evidently composed with a view to recitation: and whatever may be its
value as an authentic record, we can understand the interest with which
a Greek audience would listen to a muster-roll which was to them what
the Roll of Battle Abbey was to the descendants of the Normans in
England. If here and there, upon occasion, the wandering minstrel
inserted in the text the name and lineage of some provincial hero on his
own responsibility, the popular applause would assuredly be none the
less.




CHAPTER II.

THE DUEL OF PARIS AND MENELAUS.


The battle is set in array, “army against army.” But there is a
difference in the bearing of the opposed forces which is very
significant, and is probably a note of real character, not a mere stroke
of the poet’s art. The Trojan host, after the fashion of Asiatic
warfare, modern as well as ancient, move forward to the combat with loud
shouts and clashing of weapons. The poet compares their confused clamour
to the noise of a flock of cranes on their annual migration. The Greeks,
on the other hand, march in silence, with closed ranks, uttering no
sound, but “breathing determination.” So, when afterwards they actually
close for action, not a sound is heard in their ranks but the voice of
the leaders giving the word of command. “You would not think,” says the
poet, “that all that mighty host had tongues;” while, in the mixed
battalions of the enemy, whose allies are men of many lands and
languages, there arises a noisy discordant clamour--“like as of bleating
ewes that hear the cries of their lambs.”

But while the hostile forces yet await the signal for the battle, Paris
springs forth alone from the Trojan ranks. “Godlike” he is in his
beauty, and with the leve of personal adornment which befits his
character, he wears a spotted leopard’s hide upon his shoulders.
Tennyson’s portrait of him, though in a different scene, is thoroughly
Homeric--

                  “White-breasted like a star,
    Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard’s skin
    Drooped from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
    Clustered about his temples like a god’s.”

Advancing with long strides in the space between the armies, he
challenges the leaders of the Greeks, one and all, to meet him singly in
mortal combat. Menelaus hears the boast. “Like a hungry lion springing
on his prey,” he leaps full-armed from his chariot, exulting in the
thought that now at last his personal vengeance shall be gratified. But
conscience makes a coward of Paris. He starts back--“as a man that sees
a serpent in his path”--the godlike visage grows pale, the knees
tremble, and the Trojan champion draws back under the shelter of his
friends from the gallant hero whom he has so bitterly wronged. The Roman
historian Livy--a poet in prose--had surely this passage in his mind
when he described Sextus Tarquinius, the dishonourer of Lucretia,
quailing, as no Roman of his blood and rank would otherwise have
quailed, when young Valerius dashes out from the Roman lines to engage
him. The moral teaching of the heathen poet on such points is far higher
than that of the medieval romancers with whom he has so many points in
common. Sir Tristram of Lyonnois has no such scruples of conscience in
meeting King Mark. Lancelot, indeed, will not fight with Arthur; but the
very nobility of character with which the unknown author of that
striking impersonation has endowed him is in itself the highest of all
wrongs against morality, in that it steals the reader’s sympathies for
the wrong-doer instead of for the injured husband. Shakespeare, as is
his wont, strikes the higher key. It is the consciousness of guilt which
makes Macbeth half quail before Macduff--

    “Of all men else have I avoided thee:
     But get thee back--my soul is too much charged
     With blood of thine already.
     ...I will not fight with thee.”

Paris withdraws into the Trojan ranks, and there encounters Hector. As
has been already said, the poet assumes at the outset, on the part of
his audience, at least such knowledge of his _dramatis personæ_ as to
make a formal introduction unnecessary. Hector is the noblest of all the
sons of Priam, the shield and bulwark of his countrymen throughout the
long years of the war. Achilles is the hero of the Iliad, and to him
Homer assigns the palm of strength and valour; but, as is not seldom the
case in fiction, the author has painted the rival hero so well that our
sympathies are at least as frequently found on his side. We almost share
Juno’s feelings against the Trojans when they are represented by Paris;
but when Hector comes into the field, our hearts half go over to the
enemy. His character will be touched upon more fully hereafter: for the
present, it must discover itself in the course of the story. He throws
himself in the way of Paris in his cowardly retreat; and in spite of the
fraternal feeling which is so remarkably strong amongst Homer’s
heroes,--in Hector and his brothers almost as much as in Agamemnon and
Menelaus,--shame and disgust at his present poltroonery now mingle
themselves with a righteous hatred of the selfish lust which has
plunged his country into a bloody war--

       “Was it for this, or with such heart as now,
        O’er the wide billows with a chosen band
        Thou sailedst, and with violated vow
        Didst bring thy fair wife from the Apian strand,
        Torn from the house of men of warlike hand,
        And a great sorrow for thy father’s head,
        Troy town, and all the people of the land,
        By thine inhospitable offence hast bred,
    Thus for the enemy’s sport, thine own confusion dread?

       “Lo, now thou cowerest, and wilt not abide
        Fierce Menelaus--thou hadst known, I ween,
        Soon of what man thou hast the blooming bride!
        Poor had the profit of thy harp then been,
        Vain Aphrodite’s gifts, thy hair, thy mien,
        He mangling in the dust thy fallen brow.
        But there is no wrong to the Trojans keen,
        And they are lambs in Spirit; or else hadst thou
    Worn, for thine evil works, a cloke of stone ere now.” W.

Paris has the grace to admit the justice of his brother’s rebuke.
Hector, he confesses, is far the better soldier; only he pleads, with a
self-complacency which he never loses, that grace of person, and a
smooth tongue, and a taste for music, are nothing less than the gifts of
the gods--that, in fact, it is not his fault that he is so irresistible.
He ends, however, with an offer which is far more to Hector’s mind. Let
open lists be pitched in sight of both armies, and he will engage
Menelaus in single combat; Helen and her wealth shall be the prize of
victory.

It is a proposal at which Hector’s heart rejoices. He checks at once the
advancing line of the Trojans, and steps out himself to the front. The
Greeks bend their bows at him, but Agamemnon understands his motions,
and bids them hold their hands. It is a fair challenge which the Trojan
prince comes to make on behalf of Paris. Menelaus accepts it, in a few
plain and gallant words--he is no orator:--

    “Hear now my answer; in this quarrel I
     May claim the chiefest share; and now I hope
     Trojans and Greeks may see the final close
     Of all the labours ye so long have borne,
     T’ avenge my wrong at Paris’ hand sustained.
     And of us two whiche’er is doomed to death,
     So let him die! the rest depart in peace.” (D.)

A truce is agreed upon, to abide the result of this appeal of battle. A
messenger from Olympus--Iris, goddess of the Rainbow--comes to warn
Helen of the impending duel. And this introduces one of the most
beautiful passages in the whole Iliad, to modern taste. Its sentiment
and pathos are perfectly level and quiet; but as a natural and life-like
yet highly-wrought portrait of a scene in what we may call the social
drama, it stands almost without equal or parallel in classical
literature.

Helen--the fatal cause of the war, the object of such violent passions
and such bitter taunts--is sitting pensively in the palace of her royal
father-in-law, writing her own miserable story. She is writing it--not
in a three-volumed novel, as a lady who had a private history, more or
less creditable, would write it now, but--in a golden tapestry, in which
more laborious form it was in those days not unfrequent to write
sensational biographies. Iris urges her to be present at the show. The
whole reads like the tale of some medieval tournament, except that Helen
herself is the prize of victory as well as the Queen of Beauty. Attended
by her maidens, she goes down to the place where the aged Priam, like
the kings of the Old Testament history, “sits in the gate” surrounded
by the elders of his city. It is the “Scæan,” or “left-hand” gate, which
opens towards the camp of the enemy, and commands a view of their lines.
We have had no word as yet of the marvellous beauty of Helen. There is
no attempt to describe it throughout the whole of the poem. But here, in
a few masterly touches, introduced in the simplest and most natural
manner, Homer does more than describe it, when he tells us its effects.
The old men break off their talk as the beautiful stranger draws near.
They had seen her often enough before; the fatal face and form must have
been well known in the streets and palaces of Troy, however retired a
life Helen might well have thought it becoming in her unhappy position
to lead. But the fair vision comes upon their eyes with a new and
ever-increasing enchantment. They say each to the other as they look
upon her, “It is no blame to Greeks or Trojans to fight for such a
woman--she is worth all the ten years of war; still, let her embark and
go home, lest we and our children suffer more for her.” Even the
earliest critics, when the finer shades of criticism were little
understood, were forcibly struck with the art of the poet in selecting
his witnesses for the defence. The Roman Quintilian had said nearly all
that modern taste has since confirmed. He bids the reader mark who gives
this testimony to Helen’s charms. Not the infatuated Paris, who has set
his own honour and his country’s welfare at nought for the sake of an
unlawful passion; not some young Trojan, who might naturally be ready to
vow “the world well lost” for such a woman; nor yet any of the vulgar
crowd, easily impressed, and always extravagant in its praise or blame;
but these grave and reverend seniors, men of cold passions and calm
judgment, fathers whose sons were fighting and falling for this woman’s
sake, and even Priam himself, whose very crown and kingdom she had
brought in deadly peril. He receives her, as she draws near, with gentle
courtesy. Plainly, in his estimation, her unhappy position does not
involve necessarily shame or disgrace. This opens one of the difficult
questions of the moral doctrine of the Iliad, which can only be
understood by bearing in mind the supernatural machinery of the poem. To
the modern reader, the character of Helen, and the light in which she is
regarded alike by Greeks and Trojans, present an anomaly in morals which
is highly unsatisfactory. It is not as if Homer, like the worst writers
of the Italian school, set marriage vows at nought, and made a jest of
unchastity. Far otherwise; the heathen bard on such points took an
infinitely higher tone than many so-called Christian poets. The
difficulty lies in the fact that throughout the poem, while the crime is
reprobated, the criminal meets with forbearance, and even sympathy. Our
first natural impulse with regard to Helen is to look upon her much in
the light in which she herself, in one of her bitter confessions, says
she is looked upon by the mass of the Trojans:--

    “Throughout wide Troy I see no friendly eye,
     And Trojans shudder as I pass them by.”

But this feeling, we must remember, arose much more from her being the
cause of all the miseries of the siege, than from her having left her
Greek husband. Priam and Hector--who have certainly not a lower
morality, and a higher nobility and unselfishness, than the mass of
their countrymen--show no such feeling against her; on the contrary,
they treat her with scrupulous delicacy and consideration. So also the
leaders of the Greek forces betray no consciousness that they are
fighting, after all, for a worthless woman; rather, she is a prize to be
reclaimed, and Menelaus himself is ready from the first to receive her
back again. How is this? Some have understood the poet to represent her
abduction from her home to have been forcible--that she was carried off
by Paris entirely against her will; but even allowing this (which is not
consistent with many passages in the poem), it would not excuse or
palliate her voluntary acceptance of such a degraded position throughout
the subsequent story. The real explanation is given in a few words by
Priam in the scene before us.

                “Not thee I blame,
    But to the gods I owe this woful war.”

In Homer’s sight, as in Priam’s, she is the victim of Venus. She is “the
victim of passion,” only in a more literal and personal sense than we
use the expression. Love, lawful or unlawful, was a divine--that is, a
supernatural--force, to the mind of the poet. The spells of Venus are
irresistible: that fatal gift of beauty is the right by which the
goddess takes possession of her, and leads her captive at her evil will.
Helen herself feels her own degradation far more deeply, in fact, than
any one else seems to feel it; no one uses any expressions about her
half so bitter as those which she applies to herself; “shameless,”
“bringer of sorrow,” “whose name shall be a by-word and a reproach,” are
the terms she uses--

    “Oh that the day my mother gave me birth,
     Some storm had on the mountains cast me forth!”

We must judge Homer’s characters with reference to the light of his
religious creed--if creed it were--or at least with reference to the
supernatural element employed in the Iliad. We shall be safe, then, in
seeing Helen through Homer’s eyes. We separate her unconsciously, as he
does, from her fault. Look upon that as the poet does, as she does
herself, as Priam and Hector and Menelaus do, as her fate, her
misfortune, the weird that she has been doomed to dree,--and then, what
a graceful womanly character remains! Gentle and daughterlike to the
aged Priam, humble and tearful in the presence of her noble and generous
brother-in-law Hector, as disdainful as she dares to be to her ignoble
lord and lover,--tender, respectful, regretful, towards the gallant
husband she has deserted.

So she comes in all her grace and beauty, and takes her seat by the old
King’s side upon the watch-tower, looking out upon the camp of the
Greeks. He bids her tell him the names of such of the kings and chiefs
as she can recognise. One there is who seems indeed a “king of men,” by
the grace of nature. There are taller warriors in the host; but none of
such majestic mien and right royal bearing. It is, indeed, Agamemnon the
son of Atreus, as Helen informs him,--

    “Wide-reigning, mighty monarch, ruler good,
     And valiant warrior; in my husband’s name,
     Lost as I am, I called him brother once.”

Another chief attracts Priam’s attention, as he strides along in front
of the lines. Less in stature than Agamemnon, he is broader in the chest
and shoulders. Helen knows him well. It is Ulysses, son of Laertes,
“the man of many wiles;” nursed among the rugged cliffs of his island
kingdom of Ithaca, but already a traveller well versed in the ways of
men, the stratagems of war, and the counsels of princes. He is
recognised, too, now that Helen names him, by some of the Trojan elders;
for he, it must be remembered (and Homer assumes that we know it), had
accompanied Menelaus in the embassy to demand Helen’s restitution. Old
Antenor, now sitting by Priam’s side, well remembers the remarkable
stranger, whom he had lodged and entertained as a public guest. The
picture he draws of him is one of the most graphic and individual of all
Homer’s characters.

    “For hither when on thine account to treat,
     Brave Menelaus and Ulysses came,
     I lodged them in my house, and loved them both,
     And studied well the form and mind of each.
     As they with Trojans mixed in social guise,
     When both were standing, o’er his comrade high
     With broad-set shoulders Menelaus stood:
     Seated, Ulysses was the nobler form:
     Then, in the great assembly, when to all
     Their public speech and argument they framed,
     In fluent language Menelaus spoke,
     In words though few, yet clear; though young in years,
     No wordy babbler, wasteful of his speech:
     But when the skilled Ulysses rose to speak,
     With downcast visage would he stand, his eyes
     Bent on the ground; the staff he bore, nor back
     He waved, nor forward, but like one untaught,
     He held it motionless; who only saw,
     Would say that he was mad, or void of sense:
     But when his chest its deep-toned voice sent forth,
     With words that fell like flakes of wintry snow,
     No mortal with Ulysses could compare;
     Then, little recked we of his outward show.” (D.)

A third hero catches the eye of the Trojan king, as well he may--a
leader like Saul, “taller by the head and shoulders than the rest
of the people”--and he asks Helen to name him also. This is Ajax of
Crete, son of Telamon, a giant chieftain, “the bulwark of the Greeks,”
represented here in the Iliad as easy-tempered and somewhat heavy, as
it is the wont of giants to be, degraded by medieval and modern poets
into a mere bulk without brains. “Mars’ idiot,” Shakespeare calls him,
“who has not so much wit as would stop the eye of Helen’s needle.”
Shirley, in his ‘Ajax and Ulysses,’ carries out the same popular
notion:--

    “And now I look on Ajax Telamon,
     I may compare him to some spacious building;
     His body holds vast rooms of entertainment,
     And lower parts maintain the offices;
     Only the garret, his exalted head,
     Useless for wise receipt, is filled with lumber.”

By the side of Ajax Helen also marks King Idomeneus of Crete, a frequent
guest in the palace of Menelaus in happier times; for the court of
Sparta, as will be seen hereafter in the Odyssey, was in these heroic
days a centre of civilisation and refinement. Two chiefs Helen’s anxious
eyes vainly try to discern amongst the crowd of her countrymen,--

    “My own two brethren, and my mother’s sons,
     Castor and Pollux; Castor, horseman bold,
     Pollux, unmatched in pugilistic skill;
     In Lacedæmon have they stayed behind?
     Or can it be, in ocean-going ships
     That they have come indeed, but shame to join
     The fight of warriors, fearful of the shame
     And deep disgrace that on my name attend?” (D.)

Helen’s self-reproachful surmises have not reached the truth. The “Great
Twin Brethren,” who had once already (so the ancient legend said)
rescued their beautiful sister in her girlhood from the hands of
Theseus, who had been amongst the mighty hunters of the Calydonian boar,
and had formed part of the adventurous crew of the Argo, had finished
their mortal warfare years before in a raid in Messenia; but to reappear
as demigods in Greek and Roman legend,--the spirit horsemen who rallied
the Roman line in the great fight with the Latins at the Lake Regillus,
the “shining stars” who lighted the sailors on the stormy Adriatic, and
gave their names to the ship in which St Paul was cast away.

    “Back comes the chief in triumph,
       Who, in the hour of fight,
     Hath seen the Great Twin Brethren
       In harness on his right.
     Safe comes the ship to harbour,
       Through billows and through gales,
     If once the Great Twin Brethren
       Sit shining on the sails.”[15]

This picturesque dialogue between Priam and his fascinating guest is
interrupted far too soon for the reader’s complete enjoyment--somewhat
too abruptly, indeed, for its perfection. One would like to have heard
Helen’s estimate of the other leaders of the Greeks; of Diomed, of the
lesser Ajax, of Nestor, of Mnestheus the Athenian; and it is hardly
possible not to fancy that the scene has been left by the poet
incomplete, or that some portion has been lost past recovery. The
tragedian Æschylus, who was full of the true Homeric spirit, carried out
the idea to what seems its natural completion in a remarkable scene of
‘The Seven Chiefs against Thebes,’ to which we may hope to introduce
our readers more fully hereafter. Euripides, in his ‘Phœnissæ,’ adopts
the very same machinery; and Tasso has also imitated the scene in his
‘Jerusalem Delivered,’[16] where he brings Erminia on the walls,
pointing out to King Aladine the persons of the most renowned of the
besieging knights.

The interruption is as little satisfactory to Priam as to the reader. A
herald summons the king of Troy to a conference in the mid-space between
the city walls and the enemy’s leaguer, in order to ratify the
armistice, while Paris and Menelaus decide their quarrel in single
combat. The old man mounts his chariot, “shuddering,” as foreboding the
defeat and death of his son. Agamemnon and Ulysses on the one side,
Priam and Antenor on the other, duly slay the sacrificial lambs, and
make joint appeal to Jupiter, the Avenger of oaths, pouring the red wine
upon the earth with solemn imprecation, that so may flow forth the
heart’s blood of him who on either part shall break the truce. And the
god listens as before, but does not accept the appeal. Priam withdraws,
for he cannot bear to be a spectator of his son’s peril. Hector and
Ulysses, precisely in the fashion of the marshals in the tournaments of
chivalry, measure out the lists; the rest of the Greeks lie down on the
ground beside their horses and chariots, while the lots are cast which
shall first throw the spear. The chance falls to Paris. He throws, and
strikes full and fair in the centre of Menelaus’ round shield. But the
seasoned bull’s hide turns the point, and it does not penetrate. Next
comes the turn of Menelaus. Paris has ventured no appeal to heaven; but
the Greek king lifts his voice in prayer to Jupiter for vengeance on
the traitor who has so abused his hospitality, before he poises his long
lance carefully and hurls it at his enemy. Right through shield,
breastplate, and linen vest goes the good Greek weapon; but Paris leans
back to avoid it, and it only grazes him. Menelaus rushes forward, sword
in hand, and smites a downright blow on Paris’ crest. But the Trojan
helmet proves of better quality than the shield, and the Greek blade
flies in shivers. Maddened by his double failure, he rushes on his
enemy, and seizing him by the horse-hair crest, drags him off by main
strength towards the ranks of the Greeks. But in this extremity the
goddess of love comes to the rescue of her favourite. At her touch the
tough bullhide strap of Paris’ head-piece, which was all but choking
him, breaks, and leaves the empty helmet in the hands of Menelaus. He
hurls it amongst his comrades in disappointment and disgust, and rushes
once more in pursuit of Paris. But Venus has wrapt him in a mist, and
carried him off; and while the son of Atreus rushes like a baffled lion
up and down the lists in quest of him, while even the Trojans are aiding
in the search, and no man among them would have hidden him--for “they
all hated him like black death”--he is safely laid by the goddess in
Helen’s chamber. The scene in which she receives him is, like all the
rest of her story, a beautiful contradiction. Her first greeting is
bitter enough. Either her heart has been indeed with Menelaus in the
fight--or at least she would have had her present husband come back from
the field, dead or alive, in some more honourable fashion--

    “Back from the battle? Would thou there hadst died
     Beneath a warrior’s arm whom once I called
     My husband! Vainly didst thou boast erewhile
     Thine arm, thy dauntless courage, and thy spear,
     The warlike Menelaus should subdue!
     Go now again, and challenge to the fight
     The warlike Menelaus.--Be thou ware!
     I warn thee, pause, ere madly thou presume
     With fair-haired Menelaus to contend!” (D.)

Brave words! but still, as of old, the fatal spells of Venus are upon
her, and Paris’ misadventure in the lists is all too soon condoned.





THE BROKEN TRUCE.


The Greeks claim the victory--reasonably, since the Trojan champion has
fled the lists; but again the intrigues of the court of Olympus
interfere to interrupt the course of mortal justice. The gods of Homer
are not the gods of Epicurus’ creed, who, as our English poet sings,
“lie beside their nectar, careless of mankind.” They are anything but
careless, so far as the affairs of mortals are concerned; but their
interference is regulated by the most selfish motives. Men are the
puppets whom they make to dance for their gratification--the counters
with which they play their Olympian game, and try to defeat and
checkmate each other. Even the respect which they pay to the mortal who
is regular in the matter of offering sacrifices is entirely selfish--it
seems to be merely the sensual appetite for fat roasts and rich savours.
They are commonly influenced by jealousy, pique, revenge, or
favouritism; and where they do punish the wrongdoer, it is far more
often from a sense of _lèse-majesté_--a slight offered to some cause
which is under their special protection--than from any moral indignation
at wrong itself. When the scene opens in the fourth book of the poem,
it seems to pass at once from serious melodrama to broad comedy; and but
that these dwellers in Olympus really rule the fortunes of the tale, it
would be scarcely possible not to believe that the poet so intended it.

We are introduced again, then, to Olympus; and, as before, to a quarrel
among the Immortals. It is Jove this time who is the aggressor. He has
seen the result of the combat, and taunts Juno with the double patronage
extended to the Greeks by herself and Minerva--which, after all, has
failed--while Venus, more active and energetic, has rescued her
favourite. However, he awards the victory to Menelaus; and suggests, as
a solution to all disputes and difficulties, that now Helen should be
given up, the Greeks go home, and so the fate of Troy be averted. At the
thought of her enemy thus escaping, the queen of the gods cannot contain
her rage. Jupiter gives way. He loves Troy much, but domestic peace and
quietness more. He warns his queen, however, that if he now consents to
give up Troy to her insatiable revenge, she shall not stand in his way
hereafter, in case some community of mortals who may be her especial
favourites shall incur his royal displeasure. And Juno, with that utter
indifference to human suffering, or human justice, which characterises
the deities of Olympus, makes answer in these words:--

    “Three cities there are dearest to my heart;
     Argos, and Sparta, and the ample streets
     Of rich Mycenæ; work on them thy will--
     Destroy them, if thine anger they incur--
     I will not interpose nor hinder thee.”

In furtherance of this strange compact, Minerva is once more sent down
to the plains of Troy. Her mission now is to incite the Trojans to break
the truce by some overt act, and thus not only renew the war, but put
themselves plainly in the wrong. Clothing herself in the human shape of
the son of old Antenor, she mingles in the Trojan ranks, and addresses
herself to the cunning bowman Pandarus. His character in the Iliad has
nothing in common with the “Sir Pandarus of Troy,” whose name, as the
base uncle of Cressida, has passed into an unwholesome by-word, and whom
Lydgate, Chaucer, and, lastly, Shakespeare, borrowed from the medieval
romancers. Here he is but an archer of known skill, somewhat given to
display, with his bow of polished ibex-horns tipped with gold, and vain
of his reputation, whom the goddess easily tempts to end the long war at
once by a timely shot, and win immortal renown by taking off Menelaus.
With a brief prayer and a vow of a hecatomb to Apollo, the god of the
bow--who is supposed to be as ready as the rest of the immortals to abet
an act of treachery on such conditions--Pandarus ensconces himself
behind the shields of his comrades, and choosing out his arrow with the
same care which we read of in the great exploits of more modern bowmen,
he discharges it point-blank at the unsuspecting Menelaus. The shaft
flies true enough, but Minerva is at hand to avert the actual peril from
the Greek hero: she turns the arrow aside--

    “As when a mother from her infant’s cheek,
     Wrapt in sweet slumbers, brushes off a fly.”

It is a pretty simile; but the result is not so entirely harmless. The
arrow strikes in the belt, and so meets the double resistance of belt
and corslet. It draws blood, nevertheless, in a stream; and both
Menelaus and Agamemnon at first fear that the wound is mortal;--

    “Great Agamemnon shuddered as he saw
     The crimson blood-drops issuing from the wound,
     Shuddered the warlike Menelaus’ self;
     But when the sinew and the arrow-head
     He saw projecting, back his spirit came.
     Then, deeply groaning, Agamemnon spoke,
     As Menelaus by the hand he held,
     And with him groaned his comrades; ‘Brother dear,
     Fatal to thee hath been the oath I swore,
     When thou stoodst forth alone for Greece to fight;
     Wounded by Trojans, who their plighted troth
     Have trodden under foot.’” (D.)

Two points are remarkable in this passage: first, the tenderness which
Agamemnon shows towards his younger brother, even to the point of
self-reproach at having allowed him to fight Paris at all, though in a
quarrel which was so thoroughly his own. His expressions of grief and
remorse at the thought of going home to Greece without him (which run to
considerable length), though somewhat tinged with selfishness, inasmuch
as he feels his own honour at stake, are much more like the feeling of a
parent than of an elder brother. Again, the picture of Menelaus
“shuddering” at his own wound--so sensitive to the dread of death that
he apparently all but faints, until he is reassured by finding that the
barb of the arrow has not really penetrated--is utterly inconsistent
with our English notions of a hero. We have to bear in mind, here and
elsewhere, that these Greek heroes, of whatever race we are to suppose
them to be, are of an entirely different temperament to us cold and
self-restrained northerns. They are highly sensitive to bodily pain,
very much given to groans and tears, and very much afraid of death for
themselves, however indifferent to human life in the case of others.
Death, to these sensuous Greeks, was an object of dread and aversion,
chiefly because it implied to their minds something like annihilation.
However vivid in some passages of their poets is the description of
those happy Elysian fields where the souls of heroes dwelt, the popular
belief gave to the disembodied spirit but a shadowy and colourless
existence.

The wound is soon stanched by the aid of the skilful leech Machaon, son
of Æsculapius (and therefore grandson of Apollo “the Healer”), but who
is a warrior and chieftain as well as the rest, though he has placed his
skill at the service of Agamemnon. The King of Men himself, as soon as
his brother’s hurt is tended, rushes along the lines, rousing chiefs and
clansmen to avenge the treachery of the enemy. Idomeneus of Crete, Ajax
the Greater and the Less, Mnestheus of Athens, Ulysses, Diomed--to all
in turn he makes his passionate appeal; to some, in language which they
are inclined to resent, as implying that they were disinclined for the
combat. Diomed and Sthenelus he even reminds of the brave deeds of their
fathers Tydeus and Capaneus in the great siege of Thebes, and stings
them with the taunt, that the sons will never win the like renown.
Diomed hears in silence; but the son of Capaneus inherits, with all the
bravery, something of the insolence of the chief who swore that “with or
without the gods” he would burn Thebes: he answers the great king in
words which have yet a certain nobility in their self-assertion--

   “Atrides, lie not, when thou know’st the truth;
    We hold ourselves far better than our sires;
    We took the strength of seven-gated Thebes,
    Though with a smaller host we stormed her towers,
    Strong in heaven’s omens and the help of Jove;
    For them--their own presumption was their fall.”

All the leaders of the Greeks eagerly marshal their forces at the King’s
call. Nestor’s experienced counsel orders the line of battle--so well,
that subsequent commanders were fain to take a lesson from it.

   “In the front rank, with chariot and with horse,
    He placed the mounted warriors; in the rear,
    Num’rous and brave, a cloud of infantry,
    Compactly massed, to stem the tide of war.
    Between the two he placed th’ inferior troops,
    That e’en against their will they needs must fight.
    The horsemen first he charged, and bade them keep
    Their horses well in hand, nor wildly rush
    Amid the tumult: ‘See,’ he said, ‘that none,
    In skill or valour over-confident,
    Advance before his comrades, nor alone
    Retire; for so your lines were easier forced;
    But ranging each beside a hostile car,
    Thrust with your spears; for such the better way;
    By men so disciplined, in elder days,
    Were lofty walls and fencèd towers destroyed.’” (D.)






THE FIRST DAY’S BATTLE.


As before, while the Greek line advances in perfect silence, the Trojans
make their onset with loud shouts and a clamour of discordant war-cries
in many tongues. Mars animates the Trojans, Minerva the Greeks; while
Fear and Panic hover over the two armies, and Strife--whom the poet
describes in words which are the very echo of Solomon’s proverb--“The
beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water”--

   “With humble crest at first, anon her head,
    While yet she treads the earth, affronts the skies.”

The two armies close in battle, only embittered by the broken truce. The
description is a good specimen of the poet’s powers, and Lord Derby’s
translation is sufficiently close:--

   “Then rose the mingled shouts and groans of men
    Slaying and slain; the earth ran red with blood.
    As when descending from the mountain’s brow
    Two wintry torrents from their copious source
    Pour downwards to the narrow pass, where meet
    Their mingled waters in some deep ravine,
    Their weight of flood, on the far mountain’s side
    The shepherd hears the roar; so loud arose
    The shouts and yells of those commingling hosts.”[17]

Then begins one of those remarkable descriptions of a series of single
combats between warriors of note on either side, in which Homer delights
and excels. It must be confessed that they are somewhat wearisome to a
modern reader; although, as has been well observed, the details of
attack and defence, wounds and death, are varied in a fashion which
shows that the artist was thoroughly master of his work; and it is even
said that in the physical results assigned to each particular wound he
has shown no mean knowledge of anatomy. Still, the continuous catalogue
of ghastly wounds and dying agonies is uncongenial with our more refined
sympathies. But it was quite in harmony with the tastes of ruder days.
We find the same apparent repetition of single combats in the medieval
romances--notably in Mallory’s King Arthur; and they were probably not
the least popular portions of the tale. Even a stronger parallel case
might be found in the description of a prize-fight in the columns of
sporting newspapers, not so many years ago, when each particular blow
and its results, up to “Round 102,” were graphically described in
language quite as figurative, if not so poetic, as Homer’s; and found,
we must suppose, a sufficient circle of readers to whom it was not only
intelligible but highly interesting. The poet who recites--as we must
suppose Homer to have done--must above everything else excite and
interest his audience: his lay must be rich in incident; and to an
audience who were all more or less warlike, no incidents could be so
exciting as the details of battle. There is much savageness in Homer’s
combats; but savageness is to the taste of men whose only means of
excitement is through their grosser senses, and a love of the horrible
in fact or fiction is by no means extinct even in our own day.

Young Antilochus, the son of Nestor’s old age, draws the first blood in
the battle. He kills Echepolus.

    “Beneath his horsehair-plumèd helmet’s peak
    The sharp spear struck; deep in his forehead fixed,
    It pierced the bone: then darkness veiled his eyes,
    And, like a tower, amid the press he fell.”

Over his dead body the combat grows furious--the Greeks endeavouring to
drag him off to strip his armour, the Trojans to prevent it. The armour
of a vanquished enemy was, in these combats, something like what an
enemy’s scalp is to the Indian “brave;” to carry it off in triumph, and
hang it up in their own tents as a trophy, was the great ambition of the
slayer and his friends. Ajax, too, slays his man--spearing him right
through from breast to shoulder: and the tall Trojan falls like a
poplar--

    “Which with his biting axe the wheelwright fells.”

Ulysses, roused by the death of a friend who is killed in trying to
carry off this last body, rushes to the front, and poising his spear,
looks round to choose his victim. The foremost of his enemies recoil;
but he drives his weapon right through the temples of Demophoon, a
natural son of Priam, as he sits high in his chariot. The Trojans waver;
even Hector gives ground; the Greeks cheer, and some carry off the
bodies, while the rest press forward. It is going hard with Troy, when
Apollo, who sits watching the battle from the citadel, calls loudly to
their troops to remember that “there is no Achilles in the field
to-day.” So the fight is renewed, Minerva cheering on the Greeks, as
Apollo does the Trojans.

Diomed, the gallant son of Tydeus, now becomes the hero of the day. His
exploits occupy, indeed, so large a portion of the next book of the
poem, that it was known as “The Deeds of Diomed,” and would form,
according to one theory, a separate romance or lay of itself, exactly as
some portions of the Arthurian romance have for their exclusive hero
some one renowned Knight of the Round Table, as Tristram or Lancelot.
Diomed fights under supernatural colours. Minerva herself not only
inspires him with indomitable courage, but sheds over his whole person a
halo of celestial radiance before which the bravest Trojan might well
recoil--

    “Forth from his helm and shield a fiery light
    There flashed, like autumn’s star, that brightest shines
    When newly risen from his ocean bath.”

Once more the prince of archers, Pandarus the Lycian, comes to the
rescue of the discomfited Trojans. He bends his bow against Diomed, who
is now fighting on foot, and the arrow flies true to its mark. He sees
it strike deep into the shoulder, and the red blood streams out visibly
over the breastplate. Elated by his success, he turns round and shouts
his triumphant rallying-cry to the Trojans--“The bravest of the Greeks
is wounded to the death!” But his exultation is premature. Diomed gets
him back to his chariot, and calls on his faithful friend and charioteer
Sthenelus to draw the arrow from the wound. The blood wells out fast,
as the barb is withdrawn; but the hero puts up a brief prayer to his
guardian goddess for strength yet to avenge him of his adversary, whose
exulting boast he has just heard. Minerva hears. By some rapid celestial
pharmacy she heals the wound at once, and gives him fresh strength and
vigour, adding these words of encouragement and warning:--

    “Go fearless onward, Diomed, to meet
    The Trojan hosts; for I within thy breast
    Thy father’s dauntless courage have infused,
    Such as of old in Tydeus’ bosom dwelt,
    Bold horseman, buckler-clad; and from thine eyes
    The film that dimmed them I have purged away,[18]
    That thou mayest well ’twixt gods and men discern.
    If then some god make trial of thy force,
    With other of the Immortals fight thou not;
    But should Jove’s daughter Venus dare the fray,
    Thou need’st not shun at her to cast thy spear.” (D.)

With redoubled vigour and fury the hero returns to the battle; and again
the Trojans’ names, to each of which the poet contrives to give some
touch of individual character, swell the list of his victims. Æneas
marks his terrible career, and goes to seek for Pandarus. He points out
to him the movements of the Greek champion, and bids him try upon his
person the far-famed skill that had so nearly turned the fate of war in
the case of Menelaus. Pandarus tells him of his late unsuccessful
attempt, and declares his full belief that some glamour of more than
mortal power has made Diomed invulnerable to human weapons. He bitterly
regrets, as he tells Æneas, that he did not follow the counsels of his
father Lycaon, and bring with him to the campaign, like other chiefs of
his rank, some of those noble steeds of whom eleven pair stand always in
his father’s stalls, “champing the white barley and the spelt.” He had
feared, in truth, that they might lack provender in the straits of the
siege:--

    “Woe worth the day, when from the glittering wall,
    Hector to serve, I took my shafts and bow,
    And to fair Ilion, from my father’s hall,
    Captain of men, did with my Lycians go!
    If ever I return, if ever I know
    My country, my dear wife, my home again,
    Let me fall headless to an enemy’s blow,
    Save the red blaze of fire these arms contain!” (W.)

Æneas bids him mount with him into his chariot, and together they will
encounter this redoubtable Greek. Pandarus takes the spear and shield,
while Æneas guides the horses. Diomed is still fighting on foot, when
Sthenelus, who attends him with the chariot, sees the two hostile chiefs
bearing down upon him. He begs his comrade to remount, and avoid the
encounter with two such adversaries. Diomed indignantly refuses. He will
slay both, with the help of Heaven; and he charges Sthenelus, if such
should be the happy result, to leave his own horses and chariot,
securing the reins carefully to the chariot-front, and make prize of the
far-famed steeds of Æneas--they are descended from the immortal breed
bestowed of old by Jupiter upon King Tros. So, on foot still, he awaits
their onset. Pandarus stands high in the chariot with poised weapon,
and hails his enemy as he comes within hurling distance:--

    “Prince, thou art met! though late in vain assailed,
    The spear may enter where the arrow failed.”

It does enter, and piercing through the tough ox-hide of the shield,
stands fixed in the breastplate. Again, with premature triumph, he
shouts exultingly to Diomed that at last he has got his death-wound. But
the Greek quietly tells him that he has missed--which assuredly he
himself is not going to do. He hurls his spear in turn with fatal aim:
and the poet tells us with ghastly detail how it entered beneath the
eyeball, and passed down through the “white teeth” and tongue--

    “Till the bright point looked out beneath the chin”--

and Pandarus the Lycian closes his career, free at least from the
baseness which medieval romances have attached to his name.

Æneas, in obedience to the laws of heroic chivalry, at once leaps down
from the chariot to defend against all comers the body of his fallen
comrade.

    “And like a lion fearless in his strength
    Around the corpse he stalked this way and that,
    His spear and buckler round about him held,
    To all who dared approach him threat’ning death.”

Diomed in this case avails himself of a mode of attack not uncommon with
Homer’s heroes. He seizes a huge stone--which not two men of this
degenerate age (says Homer, with a poet’s cynicism for the present)
could have lifted--and hurls it at the Trojan prince. It strikes him on
the hip, crushes the joint, and brings him to his knees. But that his
goddess-mother Venus comes to his rescue, the world had heard the last
of Æneas, and Virgil must have sought another hero for his great poem.

    “About her much-loved son her arms she throws--
    Her arms, whose whiteness match the falling snows;
    Screened from the foe behind her shining veil,
    The swords wave harmless and the javelins fail.” (P.)

Sthenelus, for his part, remembers the orders of his friend and chief,
and drives off at once to the Greek camp with the much-coveted horses of
Æneas. Diomed rushes in pursuit of Venus--whom he knows, by his new gift
of clear vision--as she carries off her son through the ranks of the
Trojans. She, at least, of all the divinities of Olympus, had no
business, thought the Greek, in the _mêlée_ of battle. Besides, he had
received from Minerva special permission to attack her. Most
ungallantly, to our notions, he does so. The scene is such a curious
one, that it is well to give Lord Derby’s version of it:--

    “Her, searching through the crowd, at length he found,
    And springing forward, with his pointed spear
    A wound inflicted on her tender hand.
    Piercing th’ ambrosial veil, the Graces’ work,
    The sharp spear grazed her palm below the wrist.
    Forth from the wound th’ immortal current flowed,
    Pure ichor, life-stream of the blessed Gods;
    They eat no bread, they drink no ruddy wine,
    And bloodless thence and deathless they become.
    The goddess shrieked aloud, and dropped her son;
    But in his arms Apollo bore him off
    In a thick cloud enveloped, lest some Greek
    Might pierce his breast, and rob him of his life.
    Loud shouted brave Tydides, as she fled:
    ‘Daughter of Jove, from battle-fields retire;
    Enough for thee weak women to delude;
    If war thou seek’st, the lesson thou shalt learn
    Shall cause thee shudder but to hear it named.’
    Thus he; but ill at ease, and sorely pained,
    The Goddess fled: her, Iris, swift as wind,
    Caught up, and from the tumult bore away,
    Weeping with pain, her fair skin soiled with blood.”

It is the original of the grand passage in the ‘Paradise Lost,’ in which
the English poet has adopted almost literally the Homeric idea of
suffering inflicted on an immortal essence, while carefully avoiding the
ludicrous element in the scene. In the battle of the Angels, Michael
cleaves Satan down the right side:--

    “The griding sword with discontinuous wound
    Passed through him; but th’ ethereal substance closed,
    Not long divisible; and from the gash
    A stream of nectar’ous humour issuing flowed,
    Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed.”
            --Par. Lost, vi. 329.

In sore plight the goddess mounts to Olympus, and there, throwing
herself into the arms of her mother Dione, bewails the wrong she has
suffered at the hands of a presumptuous mortal. Dione comforts her as
best she may, reminding her how in times past other of the Olympian
deities have had to endure woes from men: Mars, when the giants Otus and
Ephialtes bound him for thirteen months in brazen fetters; Juno herself,
the queen of Heaven, and Pluto, the king of the Shades, had been wounded
by the daring Hercules. She foretells, however, an untimely death for
the presumptuous hero who has raised his hand against a goddess:--

                        “Fool and blind!
    Unknowing he how short his term of life,
    Who fights against the gods! for him no child
    Upon his knees shall lisp a father’s name,
    Safe from the war and battle-field returned.
    Brave as he is, let Diomed beware
    He meet not with a mightier than himself:
    Then fair Ægiale, Adrastus’ child,
    The noble wife of valiant Diomed,
    Shall long, with lamentations loud, disturb
    The slumbers of her house, and vainly mourn
    Her youthful lord, the bravest of the Greeks.” (D.)

But Dione is no prophet. Diomed returned home (if the later legends are
to be believed) to find that his wife Ægiale had been anything but
inconsolable during his absence.

Venus’ wound is healed, and her tears are soon dried. But Minerva--whose
province in the celestial government seems to be not only wisdom but
satire--cannot resist a jest upon the unfortunate plight of the Queen of
Love. She points her out to Jupiter, and suggests as a probable
explanation of the wound, that she has been trying to lead astray some
other fair Greek, like Helen,--

    “And as her hand the gentle dame caressed,
     A golden clasp has scratched her slender arm.”

Jupiter smiles, and calling his pouting daughter-goddess to his side,
recommends her in future to leave to Mars and Minerva the dangers of the
battle-field, and confine her own prowess to campaigns in which she is
likely to be more victorious.

Diomed is still rushing in pursuit of Æneas. He knows that Apollo is
shielding him; but not even this knowledge checks the impetuous Greek.

    “Thrice was his onset made, with murd’rous aim,
     And thrice Apollo struck his glittering shield;
     But when with godlike force he sought to make
     His fourth attempt, the Far-destroyer spake
     In terms of awful menace; ‘Be advised,
     Tydides, and retire; nor as a god
     Thyself esteem, since not alike the race
     Of gods immortal and of earth-born men.’” (D.)

Diomed accepts the warning, and Æneas is carried off to the temple of
Apollo in the citadel, where Latona and Diana tend and heal him. Apollo
meanwhile replaces him in the battle by a phantom likeness, round which
Greeks and Trojans continue the fight. Then he calls his brother deity
the War-god to the rescue of the hard-prest Trojans, and entreats him to
scare from the field this irreverent and outrageous champion, who, he
verily believes, would lift his spear against Olympian Jove himself. In
the likeness of a Thracian chief, Mars calls Hector to the rescue; and
the Trojan prince leaps from his chariot, and, crying his battle-cry,
turns the tide of war. Æneas is restored, sound and well, to his place
in the _mêlée_--somewhat indeed to the astonishment of his friends, who
had seen him lying so long grievously wounded; but, as the poet pithily
remarks, little time had they to ask him questions. The two Ajaxes,
Ulysses, Menelaus, and Agamemnon himself, “king of men,” come to the
forefront of the Greek battle: and the young Antilochus, son of the
venerable Nestor, notably wins his spurs. But the Trojans have
supernatural aid: and Diomed, of the purged vision, cries to his friends
to beware, for that he sees the War-god in their front brandishing his
huge spear. The Greek line warily gives ground before this immortal
adversary. The Queen of Heaven can no longer endure to be a mere
spectatress of the peril of her favourites. She obtains permission from
Jupiter to send Minerva against Mars: and the two goddesses, seated in
Juno’s chariot of state, glide down from Olympus--

    “Midway between the earth and starry heaven”--

and alight upon the plain of Troy. There Juno, taking human shape,
taunts the Greek troops with cowardice--

    “In form of Stentor of the brazen voice,
    Whose shout was as the shout of fifty men”--

and whose name has made a familiar place for itself in our English
vocabulary.

    “Shame on ye, Greeks, base cowards! brave alone
    In outward semblance: while Achilles yet
    Went forth to battle, from the Dardan gates
    The Trojans never ventured to advance.”

Minerva seeks out Diomed, whom she finds leaning on his chariot, resting
awhile from the fight, and bathing the wound made by the arrow of
Pandarus. She taunts him with his inferiority to his great father
Tydeus, who was, she reminds him, “small in stature, but every inch a
soldier.” Diomed excuses himself by reference to her own charge to
him--to fight with none of the immortals save Venus only. But now the
goddess withdraws the prohibition, and herself--putting on the “helmet
of darkness,” to hide herself from Mars--takes her place beside him in
the chariot, instead of Sthenelus, his henchman and charioteer: and the
chariot-axle groans beneath the more than mortal load. They drive in
full career against the War-god: in vain he hurls his spear against
Diomed, for the hand of the goddess turns it safely aside. The mortal
champion is more successful: his spear strikes Mars in the flank,
piercing the flesh, and drawing from him, as from Venus, the heavenly
“ichor.” And the wounded god cries out with a shout like that of ten
thousand men, so that both hosts listen to the sound with awe and
trembling. He too, like Venus, flies to Olympus, and there makes piteous
complaint of the impious deeds which, at the instigation of Minerva,
this headstrong mortal is permitted to do. His father Jupiter rates him
soundly, as the outlaw of the Olympian family, inheriting his mother
Juno’s headstrong temper. However, he bids Pæon, the physician of the
immortals, heal the wound, and Hebe prepares him a bath. Juno and
Minerva have done their work, having driven Mars from the field, and
they too quit the plains of Troy, and leave the mortal heroes to
themselves.

While Diomed still pursues his career of slaughter, Menelaus gives token
of that easy and pliant disposition which half explains his behaviour to
Helen. He has at his mercy a Trojan who has been thrown from his
chariot, and begs his life. The fair-haired king is about to spare
him,--as none in the whole story of the fight is spared,--when his
brother Agamemnon comes up, and after chiding him for such
soft-heartedness, pins the wretched suppliant to the ground with his
ashen spear.

So the fight goes on through the sixth book; which is, however, chiefly
remarkable for two of the most striking episodes in the poem. The first
is the meeting of Diomed with the young Lycian captain, Glaucus.
Encountering him in the field, and struck by his bold bearing, he asks
his name and race. Glaucus replies with that pathetic simile which,
found under many forms in many poets, has its earliest embodiment in the
verse of the Hebrew Psalmist and the Greek bard. “The days of man are
but as grass.”

        “Brave son of Tydeus, wherefore set thy mind
        My race to know? the generations are
        As of the leaves, so also of mankind.
        As the leaves fall, now withering in the wind,
        And others are put forth, and spring descends,
        Such on the earth the race of men we find;
        Each in his order a set time attends;
    One generation rises and another ends.” (W.)

The young chieftain goes on, nevertheless, to announce his birth and
lineage. He is the grandson of the noble Bellerophon--the rider of the
wondrous horse Pegasus and the slayer of the monster Chimæra--all of
whose exploits he narrates at length, with some disregard to
probabilities, in the full roar of the battle round him. It turns out
that he and Diomed are bound together by a tie which all of Greek blood
scrupulously respected--the rights of hospitality exercised towards each
other by some of their ancestors. Such obligations descended from father
to son, and served from time to time to mitigate the fierce and
vindictive spirit of an age when every man’s hand was in some sort
against another. The grandfather of Diomed had been Bellerophon’s guest
and friend. So the Greek places his spear in the ground, and vows that
he will not raise his arm against Glaucus. There are enough besides of
the Trojan allies for him to slay, and Glaucus may find Greeks enough on
whom to flesh his valour; but for themselves, the old hereditary bond
shall hold good, and in token of amity they will change armour. A good
exchange, indeed, for Diomed; for whereas his own is but of the ordinary
brass or bronze, the young Lycian’s panoply is richly inlaid with
gold--“a hundred oxen’s worth for the worth of nine.” The Greek words
have passed into a proverb.

The Trojans are still hard prest, and by the advice of his brother
Helenus, who has the gift of soothsaying, and is as it were the domestic
priest of the royal household, Hector hastens to the city, and directs
his mother Hecuba to go with her matrons in solemn procession to the
temple of Pallas, and beseech the goddess to withdraw the terrible
Diomed from the field. In the palace, to his indignation, he finds
Paris dallying with Helen, and polishing his armour instead of joining
the fight. Hector upbraids him sharply: and Helen, in a speech full of
self-abasement, laments the unworthiness of her paramour. Hector speaks
no word of reproach to her, though he gently declines her invitation to
rest himself also a while from the battle. Paris promises to follow him
at once to the field; and Hector moves on to his own wife’s apartments,
to see her and his child once more before he goes back to the combat
which he has a half-foreboding will end fatally for himself, whatever be
the fortunes of Troy.

And now we are introduced to the second female character in the poem,
standing in the strongest possible contrast with that of Helen, but of
no less admirable conception. It is remarkable how entirely Homer
succeeds in interesting us in his women, without having recourse to what
might seem to us the very natural expedient of dwelling on their
personal charms; especially when it is taken into account that, in his
simple narrative, he has not the resources of the modern novelist, who
can make even the plainest heroine attractive by painting her mental
perfections, or setting before us the charms of her conversation. It has
been said that he rather assumes than describes the beauty of Helen: in
the case of Andromache, it has been remarked that he never once applies
to her any epithet implying personal attractions, though all his
translators, Lord Derby included, have been tempted to do so. It is as
the wife and mother that Andromache charms us. We readily assume that
she is comely, graceful--all that a woman should be; but it is simple
grace of domestic character which forms the attraction of the Trojan
princess.

Hector does not find her, as he expects, in the palace. She had heard
how the fortunes of the day seemed turning against the Trojans; and she
had hurried, “like one distraught,” to the tower of the citadel, to see
with her own eyes how the fight was going. He meets her at the Scæan
gates, with the nurse and the child, “whom Hector called Scamandrius,
from the river, but the citizens Astyanax”--“defender of the city.” The
father looks silently on his boy, and smiles; Andromache in tears clings
to her husband, and makes a pathetic appeal to him not to be too
prodigal of a life which is so dear to his wife and child. Her fate has
been already that of many women of her day. Her father and seven tall
brethren have been slain by the fierce Achilles, when ravaging the
country round Troy he destroyed their native city of Cilician Thebes:
her mother too is dead, and she is left alone. She adds the touching
loving confession, which Pope’s version has made popular enough even to
unclassical ears--

    “But while my Hector still survives, I see
    My father, mother, brethren, all in thee.”

Hector soothes her, but it is with a mournful foreboding of evil to
come. He values too much his own honour and fair fame to shrink from the
battle:--

                      “I should blush
    To face the men and long-robed dames of Troy,
    If like a coward I could shun the fight;
    Nor could my soul the lessons of my youth
    So far forget, whose boast it still has been
    In the fore-front of battle to be found,
    Charged with my father’s glory and mine own.
    Yet in my inmost soul too well I know
    The day must come when this our sacred Troy,
    And Priam’s race, and Priam’s royal self,
    Shall in one common ruin be o’erthrown.” (D.)

But that which wrings his heart most of all is the vision before his
eyes of his beloved wife dragged into slavery. Pope’s version of the
rest of the passage is so good of its kind, and has so naturalised the
scene to our English conceptions, that no closer version will ever
supersede it.

    “Thus having spoke, th’ illustrious chief of Troy
    Stretched his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy;
    The babe clung crying to his nurse’s breast,
    Scared at the dazzling helm and nodding crest.
    With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
    And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
    The glitt’ring terrors from his brows unbound,
    And placed the beaming helmet on the ground.
    Then kissed the child, and lifting high in air,
    Thus to the Gods preferred a father’s prayer:
    ‘O thou! whose glory fills th’ ethereal throne,
    And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
    Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
    To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
    Against his country’s foes the war to wage,
    And rise the Hector of the future age!
    So when triumphant from successful toils,
    Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
    Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
    And say--This chief transcends his father’s fame:
    While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
    His mother’s conscious heart o’erflows with joy.’
    He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
    Restored the pleasing burthen to her arms;
    Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
    Hushed to repose, and with a smile surveyed.
    The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
    She mingled with the smile a tender tear.
    The softened chief with kind compassion viewed,
    And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued.”

The “charms,” be it said, are entirely Pope’s idea, and do not harmonise
with the simplicity of the true Homeric picture. The husband was not
thinking of his wife’s beauty. He “caresses her with his hand,” and
tries to cheer her with the thought that no hero dies until his work is
done.

    “For, till my day of destiny is come,
    No man may take my life; and when it comes,
    Nor brave nor coward can escape that day.
    But go thou home, and ply thy household cares,
    The loom and distaff, and appoint thy maids
    Their several tasks; and leave to men of Troy,
    And chief of all to me, the toils of war.” (D.)

The tender yet half-contemptuous tone in which the iron soldier
relegates the woman to her own inferior cares, is true to the spirit of
every age in which war is the main business of man’s life. Something in
the same tone is the charming scene between Hotspur and his lady in
Shakspeare’s ‘Henry IV.’

    “_Hotspur._ Away, you trifler!--Love? I love thee not,--
      I care not for thee, Kate; this is no world
      To play with mammets and to tilt with lips:
      We must have bloody noses and crack’t crowns,
      And pass them current too.--God’s me, my horse!--
      What say’st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have with me?

    _Lady Percy._ Do you not love me? Do you not indeed?
      Well,--do not, then; for since you love me not,
      I will not love myself.--Do you not love me?
      Nay, tell me if you speak in jest, or no.

    _Hotspur._ Come, wilt thou see me ride?
      And when I am o’ horseback, I will swear
      I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate:
      I must not have you henceforth question me
      Whither I go, nor reason whereabout;
      Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude,
      This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
      I know you wise; but yet, no further wise
      Than Harry Percy’s wife: constant you are--
      But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
      No lady closer: for I well believe
      Thou wilt not utter that thou dost not know.”

Hector and his wife part; he to the fight, accompanied now by Paris,
girt for the battle in glittering armour, the show knight of the
Trojans: Andromache back to the palace, casting many a lingering glance
behind at the gallant husband she is fated never again to see alive. The
Roman ladies of the last days of the Republic were not much given to
sentiment; but we do not wonder that Brutus’s wife, Portia, knowing well
the Homeric story, was moved to tears in looking at a picture of this
parting scene.






THE SECOND DAY’S BATTLE.


By the advice of his brother Helenus, who knows the counsels of heaven,
Hector now challenges the Greek host to match some one of their
chieftains against him in single combat. There is an unwillingness even
amongst the bravest to accept the defiance--so terrible is the name of
Hector. Menelaus--always gallant and generous--is indignant at their
cowardice, and offers himself as the champion. He feels he is no match
for Hector; but, as he says with modest confidence, the issues in such
case lie in the hands of heaven. But Agamemnon, ever affectionately
careful of his brother, will not suffer such unequal risk: some more
stalwart warrior shall be found to maintain the honour of the Achæans.
Old Nestor rises, and loudly regrets that he has no longer the eye and
sinews of his youth--but the men of Greece, he sees with shame, are not
now what they were in his day. Stung by the taunt, nine chiefs spring to
their feet at once, and offer themselves for the combat. Conspicuous
amongst them are Diomed, the giant Ajax, and King Agamemnon himself; and
when the choice of a champion is referred to lot, the hopes and wishes
of the whole army are audibly expressed, that on one of these three the
lot may fall. It falls on Ajax; and amidst the congratulations and
prayers of his comrades, the tall chieftain dons his armour, and strides
forth to meet his adversary. The combat is maintained with vigour on
both sides, till dusk comes on; the heralds interpose, and they separate
with mutual courtesies and exchange of presents.

Both armies agree to a truce, that they may collect and burn their dead
who strew the plain thickly after the long day’s battle. The Trojans,
dispirited by their loss, and conscious that, owing to the breach of the
first truce by the treacherous act of Pandarus, they are fighting under
the curse of perjury, hold a council of war, in which Antenor (the
Nestor of Troy) proposes to restore Helen and her wealth, and so put an
end at last to this weary siege. But Paris refuses--he will give back
the treasure, but not Helen; and the proposal thus made is spurned by
the Greeks as an insult. They busy themselves in building a
fortification--ditch, and wall, and palisade--to protect their fleet
from any sudden incursion of the Trojans. When this great work is
completed, they devote the next night to one of those heavy feasts and
deep carousals, to which men of the heroic mould have always had the
repute of being addicted in the intervals of hard fighting. Most
opportunely, a fleet of merchant-ships comes in from Lemnos, laden with
wine; in part a present sent by Euneus, son of the renowned voyager
Jason, to the two royal brothers; in part a trading speculation, which
meets with immediate success among the thirsty host. The thunder of
Olympus rolls all through the night, for the Thunderer is angry at the
prolongation of the war: but the Greeks content their consciences with
pouring copious libations to appease his wrath, and after their
prolonged revelry sink into careless slumber.

At daybreak Jupiter holds a council in Olympus, and harangues the
assembled deities at some length--with a special request that he may not
be interrupted. He forbids, on pain of his royal displeasure, any
further interference on the part of the Olympians on either side in the
contest; and then, mounting his chariot, descends in person to Mount Ida
to survey the field of battle, once more crowded with fierce combatants.
He hesitates, apparently, which side he shall aid--for he has no
intention of observing for himself the neutrality which he has so
strictly enjoined upon others. So he weighs in a balance the fates of
Greek and Trojan: the former draws down the scale, while the destiny of
Troy mounts to heaven. The metaphor is reversed, according to our modern
notions; it is the losing side which should be found wanting when
weighed in the balance. And so Milton has it in the passage which is
undoubtedly founded on these lines of Homer. “The Omnipotent,” says
Milton,

    “Hung forth in heaven His golden scales, yet seen
    Betwixt Astræa and the Scorpion sign,
    Wherein all things created first He weighed,
    The pendulous round earth with balanced air
    In counterpoise; now ponders all events,
    Battles and realms; in these He put two weights,
    The sequel each of parting and of fight:
    The latter quick up flew and kicked the beam.”

And Gabriel bids Satan look up, and mark the warning:--

                      “‘For proof look up,
    And read thy lot in yon celestial sign,
    Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
    If thou resist!’ The Fiend looked up, and knew
    His mounted scale aloft; nor more, but fled
    Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.”
            --Par. Lost, end of B. iv.

In accordance with this decision the Thunderer sends his lightnings down
upon the host of the Greeks, and throws them into terror and confusion.
Nestor, still in the thickest of the fray, has one of his chariot-horses
killed by a shaft from the bow of Paris; and while he is thus all but
helpless, Diomed sees the terrible Hector bearing down on the old chief
in full career. He bids Nestor mount with him, and together they
encounter the Trojan prince, against whom Diomed hurls his spear: he
misses Hector, but kills his charioteer. As Diomed presses on, a
thunderbolt from Jupiter ploughs the ground right in front of his
startled horses. Nestor sees in this omen the wrath of heaven; and at
his entreaty Diomed reluctantly allows him to turn the horses, and
retires, pursued by the loud taunts of Hector, who bids the Greek
“wench” go hide herself. Thrice he half turns to meet his jesting enemy,
and thrice the roll of the angry thunder warns him not to dare the wrath
of the god. Hector in triumph shouts to his comrades to drive the Greeks
back to their new trenches, and burn their fleet. He calls to his horses
by name (he drove a bright bay and a chestnut, and called them Whitefoot
and Firefly), and bids them do him good suit and service now, if ever,
in return for all the care they have had from Andromache, who has fed
them day by day with her own hands, even before she would offer the
wine-cup to their thirsty master. The Greeks are driven back into their
trenches, where they are rallied by the royal brothers Agamemnon and
Menelaus in person. They have too on their side a bowman as good as
Pandarus or Paris, who now does them gallant service. It is Teucer, the
younger brother of the huge Ajax. The description of his manner of fight
would suit almost exactly the light archer and his pavoise-bearer of the
medieval battle:--

    “Ajax the shield extended: Teucer then
    Peered from behind, and with a shaft forth stept,
    And slew one singled from the enemy’s men:
    Then, as a child creeps to his mother, crept
    To Ajax, who the shield before him swept.” (W.)

Eight times he draws his bow, and every arrow reaches its mark in a
Trojan. Twice he shoots at Hector, but each time the shaft is turned
aside, and finds some less renowned victim. Of these the last is
Hector’s charioteer--the second who in this day’s battle has paid the
forfeit of that perilous honour. Hector leaps down to avenge his death,
and Teucer, felled to the ground by a huge fragment of rock, is carried
off the field with a broken shoulder, still covered by the shield of
Ajax. The Greeks remain penned within their stockade, and nothing but
the approach of night saves their fleet from destruction. The victorious
Trojans bivouac on the field, their watch-fires lighting up the night;
for Hector’s only fear now is lest his enemies should embark and set
sail under cover of the darkness, and so escape the fate which he is
confident awaits them on the morrow. Mr Tennyson has chosen for
translation the fine passage describing the scene, which closes the
Eighth Book:--

    “As when in heaven the stars about the moon
    Look beautiful, when all the winds are laid,
    And every height comes out, and jutting peak,
    And valley, and the immeasurable heavens
    Break open to their highest, and all the stars
    Shine, and the shepherd gladdens in his heart:
    So many a fire between the ships and stream
    Of Xanthus blazed before the towers of Troy,
    A thousand on the plain; and close by each
    Sat fifty in the blaze of burning fire;
    And, champing golden grain, the horses stood
    Hard by their chariots, waiting for the dawn.”






THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


The opening of the Ninth Book shows us the Greeks utterly disheartened
inside their intrenchments. The threat of the dishonoured Achilles is
fast being accomplished: they cannot stand before Hector. Agamemnon
calls a hasty council, and proposes--in sad earnest, this time--that all
should re-embark and sail home to Greece. The proposal is received in
silence by all except Diomed. He boldly taunts the king with cowardice:
the other Greeks may go home if they will, but he and his good comrade
Sthenelus will stay and fight it out, even if they fight alone. Then
Nestor takes the privilege of his age to remind Agamemnon that his
insult to Achilles is the real cause of their present distress. Let an
embassy be sent to him where he lies beside his ships, in moody
idleness, to offer him apology and compensation for the wrong. The king
consents; and Ajax, Ulysses, and Phœnix are chosen to accompany the
royal heralds on this mission of reconciliation. Ajax--the chief who in
all warlike points stands second only to Achilles himself in the
estimation of the army--is a delegate to whom even the great captain of
the Myrmidons must surely listen with respect. Phœnix has been a sort of
foster-father to Achilles from his boyhood, intrusted with the care of
him by his father Peleus, and has now accompanied him to the war by the
old man’s special request, to aid him with advice and counsel. If any
one in the camp has any influence over the headstrong prince, it will be
the man who, as he says, has dandled him in his arms in his helpless
infancy. And no diplomatic enterprise could be complete without the
addition of Ulysses, the man of many devices and of persuasive tongue.
The chiefs set forth, and take their way along the shore to the camp of
the Myrmidons. They find Achilles sitting in his tent, solacing his
perturbed spirit with playing on the lyre, to the music of which he
sings the deeds of heroes done in the days of old--the exact prototype
of those knightly troubadours of later times, who combined the
accomplishments of the minstrel with the prowess of the soldier. His
faithful henchman Patroclus sits and listens to the song. With graceful
and lofty courtesy the chief of the Myrmidons rises from his seat, and
lays his lyre aside, and welcomes his visitors. He will hear no message
until they have shared his hospitality. He brings them in, and sets them
down on couches spread with purple tapestry. Then, with the grand
patriarchal simplicity of the days of Abraham, when no office done for a
guest was held to be servile, he bids Patroclus fill a larger bowl, and
mix the wine strong, and make good preparation of the flesh of sheep,
and goats, and well-fed swine. The great hero himself divides the
carcases, while his charioteer Automedon holds them. The joints are
cooked above the heaped embers on ample spits under the superintendence
of Patroclus; and when all is ready, they fall to with that wholesome
appetite which has been the characteristic of most heroes in classical
and medieval times, Achilles carving for his guests, while Patroclus
deals out the bread. Professor Wilson’s remarks on the scene are
characteristic:--

“In nothing was the constitution of the heroes more enviable than its
native power--of eating at all times, and without a moment’s warning.
Never does a meal to any distinguished individual come amiss. Their
stomachs were as heroic as their hearts, their bowels magnanimous. It
cannot have been forgotten by the reader, who hangs with a watering
mouth over the description of this entertainment, that about two hours
before these three heroes, Ulysses, Ajax, and old Phœnix, had made an
almost enormous supper in the pavilion of Agamemnon. But their walk

    ‘Along the margin of the sounding deep’

had reawakened their slumbering appetite.”

In this respect, too, the heroes of the Carlovingian and Arthurian
romances equal those of Homer--probably, indeed, taking their colour
from his originals. Nay, a good capacity for food and drink seems in
itself to have been considered an heroic quality. When Sir Gareth of
Orkney sits him down at table, coming as a stranger to King Arthur’s
court, his performance as a trencher-man excites as much admiration as
his soldier-like thews and sinews. The company declare of him
enthusiastically that “they never saw so goodly a man, nor so well of
his eating.” And in the same spirit Sir Kay, Arthur’s foster-brother, is
said, in the Welsh legend, to “have drunk like four, and fought like a
hundred.” The animal virtues are closely linked together; we still
prognosticate favourably of a horse’s powers of endurance if we see
that he is, like Sir Gareth, a good feeder. And perhaps it is some
lingering reminiscence of the old heroic ages that leads us still to
mark our appreciation of modern heroes by bestowing on them a public
dinner.

When the meal is over, Ulysses rises, and in accordance with immemorial
custom--as old, it appears, as these half-mythical ages--pledges the
health of their illustrious host. In a speech which does full justice to
the oratorical powers which the poet assigns him, he lays before
Achilles the proposal of Agamemnon. He sets forth the straits to which
the Greeks are reduced, pent within their fortifications by the terrible
Hector, and acknowledges, in the fullest manner, that in the great name
of Achilles lies their only hope of rescue. He dwells upon the remorse
which Achilles himself will surely feel, when too late, if he suffers
the hopes of Greece to be ruined by the indulgence of his own haughty
spirit--the temper against which, as he reminds him, his aged father
warned him when first he set out for Troy:--

    “My son, the boon of strength, if so they will,
    Juno or Pallas have the power to give;
    But thou thyself thy haughty spirit must curb,
    For better far is gentle courtesy.”

He lays before him the propositions of Agamemnon. Briseis shall be
restored to him, in all honour, pure as when she left him; so the great
point in the quarrel is fully conceded. Moreover, the king will give him
the choice of his three daughters in marriage, if it ever be their happy
fate to see again the shores of Argos, and will add such dowry

    “As never man before to daughter gave.”

And he will send, for the present, peace-offerings of royal
magnificence; ten talents of pure gold, seven fair Lesbian slaves, “well
skilled in household cares,” twelve horses of surpassing fleetness--the
prizes they have already won would be in themselves a fortune--and seven
prosperous towns on the sea-coast of Argos. He adds, in well-conceived
climax to his speech, an appeal to higher motives. If Achilles will not
relax his wrath against Agamemnon, at least let him have some compassion
on the unoffending Greeks; let him bethink himself of the national
honour--of his own great name; shall Hector be allowed to boast, as he
does now, that no Greek dares meet him in the field?

But neither the eloquence of Ulysses, nor the garrulous pleading of his
old foster-father Phœnix, who indulges himself and his company with
stories of Achilles’ boyhood, and of the exploits of his own younger
days, can bend the iron determination of the hero. He will have none of
Agamemnon’s gifts, and none of Agamemnon’s daughters--no, not were the
princess as fair as Venus. Greece has store of fair maidens for him to
choose from if he will. Nay, had either woman or wealth been his
delight, he had scarce come to Troy. He had counted the cost when he set
out for the war:--

    “Successful forays may good store provide;
    And tripods may be gained, and noble steeds:
    But when the breath of man hath passed his lips,
    Nor strength, nor foray can the loss repair.
    I by my goddess mother have been warned,
    The silver-footed Thetis, that o’er me
    A double chance of destiny impends:
    If here remaining, round the walls of Troy
    I wage the war, I ne’er shall see my home,
    But then undying glory shall be mine:
    If I return, and see my native land,
    My glory all is gone; but length of life
    Shall then be mine, and death be long deferred.” (D.)

Besides, he adds with biting sarcasm, Agamemnon can have no need now of
his poor services. He has built a wall, he hears,--with ditch and
palisade to boot: though he doubts whether, after all, it will keep out
Hector. To be sure, when _he_ was in the field, no wall was needed.

Nor is he a whit more moved by the few blunt and soldier-like remarks
with which Ajax closes the conference. They may as well return, says
that chief to Ulysses; words are lost upon one so obstinate as Achilles,
who will neither listen to reason, nor cares for the love of his old
companions in arms. Ajax has no patience, either, with the romantic side
of the quarrel--

    “And for a single girl! we offer seven.”

Reproach and argument are alike in vain. The hero listens patiently and
courteously; but nothing shall move him from his resolution, unless
Hector, the godlike, shall carry fire and sword even to the ships and
tents of the Myrmidons; a venture which, he thinks, the Trojan prince,
with all his hardihood, will pause before he makes.

With downcast hearts the envoys return to Agamemnon; the aged Phœnix
alone remaining behind, at Achilles’ special request, to accompany him
when he shall set sail for home. Great consternation falls on the
assembled chiefs when they learn the failure of their overtures; only
Diomed, chivalrous as ever, laments that they should have stooped to ask
grace at such a churlish hand. Let Achilles go or stay as he will: for
themselves--let every man refresh himself with food and wine--“for
therein do lie both strength and courage”--and then betake themselves to
their no less needful rest: ready, so soon as “the rosy-fingered dawn”
appears, to set the battle fearlessly in array, in front of their ships
and tents, against this redoubtable Hector.

But

    “Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.”

There is no rest for the King of Men, who has the fate of a national
armament on his soul. He looks forth upon the plain, where the thousand
watchfires of the enemy are blazing out into the night, and hears the
confused hum of their thick-lying battalions, and the sounds of the wild
Eastern music with which they are enlivening their revels, and
celebrating their victory by anticipation. He rises from his troubled
couch, determined to hold a night-council with Nestor and other chiefs
of mark. He is donning his armour, when he is visited by his brother
Menelaus--for he too has no rest, thinking of the dire straits into
which in his sole cause the armies of Greece are driven. The royal
brothers go in different directions through the camp, and quietly rouse
all the most illustrious captains. Nestor is the guiding spirit in the
council, as before. He advises a reconnoissance of the enemy’s lines
under cover of the darkness. The office of a spy, be it remembered, was
reckoned in these old times, as in the days of the Hebrew commonwealth,
a service of honour as well as of danger; and the kings and chiefs of
the Greeks no more thought it beneath their dignity than Gideon did in
the case of the Midianites. The man who could discover for them the
counsels of Hector would win for himself not only a solid reward, but an
immortal name--

    “High as heaven in all men’s mouths
    Should be his praise, and ample his reward;
    For every captain of a ship should give
    A coal-black ewe, and at her foot a lamb,
    A prize beyond compare: and high should be
    His place at banquets and at solemn feasts.”

Diomed straightway volunteers for the adventure, and out of the many
chiefs who offer themselves as his comrade, he chooses Ulysses. So--not
without due prayer to Heaven--valour and subtlety go forth together on
their perilous errand.

Meanwhile the same idea has occurred to Hector; he too would learn the
counsels of his enemies. One Dolon--a young warrior who has a fine taste
for horses, but is otherwise of somewhat feminine type (Homer tells us
he was the only brother of five sisters), and whose main qualification
is fleetness of foot--is tempted to undertake the enterprise on a
somewhat singular condition--that he shall have as his prize the more
than mortal horses of Achilles, when, as he doubts not will be soon the
case, the spoils of the conquered Greeks shall come to be divided. And
Hector, with equal confidence, swears “by his sceptre” that they shall
be his and none other’s. Wrapped in a cloak of wolfskin, and wearing a
cap of marten’s fur instead of a helmet, he too steals out into the
night. He does not escape the keen vision of Ulysses. The Greek spies
crouch behind some dead bodies, and allow him to pass them, when they
rise and cut off his retreat to the Trojan camp. At first he thinks they
are Trojans, sent after him by Hector;

     “But when they came a spear-cast off, or less,
      He knew them for his foes, and slipt away
      With lithe knees flying: and they behind him press.
      As when with jaggèd teeth two dogs of prey
      Hang steadily behind, to seize and slay,
      Down the green woods, a wild fawn or a hare,
      That shrieking flies them; on his track so lay
      Odysseus and the son of Tydeus there,
    Winding him out from Troy, and never swerved a hair.” (W.)

Their aim is to take him alive. Diomed at last gets within an easy
spear-cast--

     “Then, hurling, he so ruled his aim, the spear
      Whizzed by the neck, then sank into the ground.
      He, trembling in his teeth, and white with fear,
      Stood: from his mouth there came a chattering sound.
      They panting, as he wept, his arms enwound.
      ‘Take me alive, and sell me home,’ cried he;
      ‘Brass, iron, and fine gold are with me found.
      Glad will my father render countless fee,
    If living by the ships they bear him news of me.’” (W.)

Ulysses parleys with the unhappy youth, and drags from his terrified
lips not only the secret of his errand, but the disposition of the
Trojan forces,--most convenient information for their own movements.
Especially, he tells them where they might find an easy prey, such as
his own soul would love. Rhesus, king of the Thracian allies, has his
camp apart--

          “No steeds that e’er I saw,
    For size and beauty, can with his compare;
    Whiter than snow, and swifter than the wind.”

The unwilling treachery does not save his wretched life. Ulysses
sarcastically admires his choice of a reward--

   “High soared thy hopes indeed, that thought to win
    The horses of Achilles; hard are they
    For mortal man to harness or control,
    Save for Achilles’ self, the goddess-born.”

Then--with the cruel indifference to human life which marks every one of
Homer’s heroes--he severs his head from his body.

Following the directions given by Dolon, the two Greeks make their way
first to the quarters of the Thracian contingent. Swiftly and silently
Diomed despatches the king and twelve of his warriors, as they sleep,
while Ulysses drives off the snow-white horses. With these trophies they
return safe to the Greek camp, where they are cordially welcomed, though
it must be admitted they have gained but little insight into the designs
of Hector.[19]





THE THIRD BATTLE.


With the morrow’s dawn begins the third and great battle, at the Greek
lines, which occupies from the eleventh to the eighteenth book of the
poem. Agamemnon is the hero of the earlier part of the day, and Hector
is warned by Jupiter not to hazard his own person in the battle, unless
the Greek king is wounded; which at last he is, by the spear of a son of
Antenor. Ulysses and Diomed supply his place; until Paris, fighting in
somewhat coward fashion, crouching behind the monumental stone of the
national hero Ilus, pins Diomed through the right heel to the ground
with an arrow. Ulysses stands manfully at bay almost alone amidst a host
of enemies, holding his ground, though he too is wounded, till Ajax
comes to his aid. Still the Greeks have the worst of it. The skilful
leech Machaon, amongst others, is wounded by an arrow from the bow of
Paris: till even Achilles, watching the fight from the lofty prow of his
ship, sees his day of triumph and vengeance close at hand. He sends
Patroclus to the field--nominally to inquire who has just been carried
off wounded, but with the further object, we may suppose, of learning
the state of the case more thoroughly. Nestor, to whose tent Patroclus
comes, begs him to use his influence now with his angry chief, and
persuade him, if not to come to the rescue in person, at least to send
his stout Myrmidons to the aid of his countrymen, under Patroclus’ own
command.

Again the Greeks are driven within their intrenchments, and Hector and
the Trojan chariot-fighters pressing on them, attempt in their fierce
excitement even to make their horses leap the ditch and palisade. Foiled
in this, they dismount, and, forming in five detachments under the
several command of Hector, Helenus, Paris, Æneas, and Asius son of
Hyrtacus, they attack the stockade at five points at once. Asius alone
refuses to quit his chariot; and choosing the quarter where a gate is
still left open to receive the Greek fugitives, he drives full at the
narrow entrance. But in that gateway on either hand stand two stalwart
warders, Leonteus and Polypates. The latter is the son of the mighty
hero Pirithous, friend and comrade of Hercules, and both are of the
renowned race of the Lapithæ. Gallantly the two champions keep the
dangerous post against all comers, while their friends from the top of
the rampart shower huge stones upon their assailants. Even Hector at his
point of attack can make no impression: and as his followers vainly
strive to pass the ditch, an omen from heaven strikes them with
apprehension as to the final issue. An eagle, carrying off a huge
serpent through the air, is bitten by the reptile, and drops it,
writhing and bleeding, in the midst of the combatants. Polydamas points
it out to Hector, and reads in it a warning that their victory will be
at best a dearly-bought one. Hector rebukes him for his weakness in
putting faith in portents. The noble words in which the poet sums up
Hector’s creed in such matters have passed into a proverb with patriots
of every age and nation--

    “The best of omens is our country’s cause.”

Sarpedon the Lycian, who claims none less than Jupiter for his father,
has taken chief command of the Trojan auxiliaries, and, gallantly
seconded by his countryman Glaucus, sweeps “like a black storm” on the
tower where Mnestheus, the Athenian, commands, and is like to have
carried it, when Glaucus falls wounded by an arrow from Teucer. The
slaughter is terrible on both sides, and the ditch and palisade are red
with blood. “The balance of the fight hangs even;” until at last the
Trojan prince lifts a huge fragment of rock, and heaves it at the wooden
gates which bar the entrance at his point of attack.

   “This way and that the severed portals flew
    Before the crashing missile; dark as night
    His low’ring brow, great Hector sprang within;
    Bright flashed the brazen armour on his breast,
    As through the gates, two javelins in his hand,
    He sprang; the gods except, no power might meet
    That onset; blazed his eyes with lurid fire.
    Then to the Trojans, turning to the throng,
    He called aloud to scale the lofty wall;
    They heard, and straight obeyed; some scaled the wall;
    Some through the strong-built gates continuous poured;
    While in confusion irretrievable
    Fled to their ships the panic-stricken Greeks.” (D.)

Neptune has been watching the fight from the wooded heights of
Samothrace, and sees the imminent peril of his friends. “In four mighty
strides”--the woods and mountains trembling beneath his feet--he reaches
the bay of Œge, in Achaia, where far in the depths lie his shining
palaces of gold. There the sea-god mounts his chariot, yoking

   “Beneath his car the brazen-footed steeds,
    Of swiftest flight, with manes of flowing gold.
    All clad in gold, the golden lash he grasped
    Of curious work, and, mounting on his car,
    Skimmed o’er the waves; from all the depths below
    Gambolled around the monsters of the deep,
    Acknowledging their king; the joyous sea
    Parted her waves; swift flew the bounding steeds;
    Nor was the brazen axle wet with spray,
    When to the ships of Greece their lord they bore.” (D.)

He takes the form of the soothsayer Calchas, and in his person rallies
the discomfited Greeks, and summons the greater and the lesser Ajax to
the rescue. Both feel a sudden accession of new vigour and courage; Ajax
Oileus detects the divinity of their visitor, as the seeming Calchas
turns to depart. The two chiefs quickly gather round them a phalanx of
their comrades.

   “Spear close by spear, and shield by shield o’erlaid,
    Buckler to buckler pressed, and helm to helm,
    And man to man; the horse-hair plumes above,
    That nodded on the warriors’ glittering crests,
    Each other touched, so closely massed they stood.
    Backward by many a stalwart hand were drawn
    The spears, in act to hurl; their eyes and minds
    Turned to the front, and eager for the fray.” (D.)

Hector’s career is stayed. Ajax the Lesser brings into play his band of
Locrian bowmen, of little use in the open field, but good when they are
under cover.

                “Theirs were not the hearts
    To brook th’ endurance of the standing fight;
    Nor had they brass-bound helms with horse-hair plume,
    Nor ample shields they bore, nor ashen spear,
    But came to Troy in bows and twisted slings
    Of woollen cloth confiding.”

The galling storm of their arrows throws confusion into the Trojan
ranks. Helenas and Deiphobus, Hector’s brothers, have already been led
off wounded: Asius son of Hyrtacus has found his trust in chariot and
horses vain, and lies dead within the Greek lines. But Hector still
presses on, and Paris shows that he can play the soldier on occasion as
successfully as the gallant. The Greeks, too, miss their leaders.
Agamemnon, Ulysses, Diomed, are all disabled for the time. The two
Ajaxes and Idomeneus of Crete do all that man can do. But the stockade
has been forced, and the fight is now round the ships,--the last hope of
bare safety for the Greek forces. If Hector burns them, as he boasts he
will, all means of retreat, all the long-cherished prospect of seeing
their homes again, are lost to them. In a hasty conference with his
wounded companions beside his galley, Agamemnon, suffering and
dispirited, once more counsels retreat before it be too late. If they
can but hold out till nightfall, then, under cover of the darkness, he
proposes to take the sea. Those vessels which lie close to the shore may
be launched at once without discovery from the enemy, and kept out at
anchor: the rest can follow when the Trojans have, as usual, withdrawn
from immediate attack, as soon as the shades of evening make the
distinction hazardous between friend and foe. Ulysses and Diomed
overrule the proposal; and the wounded leaders return to the scene of
combat, unable to take an active part, but inspiriting their men from
safe posts of observation.

The interlude of comedy is furnished again by the denizens of Olympus.
Juno has watched with delight the successful efforts of Neptune to rally
the Greeks against Hector and the hateful Trojans; but she is in an
agony of apprehension lest Jupiter, who has his attention just now
occupied in Thrace, should interfere at this critical moment, and still
grant the victory to Hector. She determines to put in force all her
powers of blandishment, and to coax the Thunderer to spend in her
company those precious hours which are laden with the fate of her
Greeks. She is not content with her ordinary powers of fascination: she
applies to the goddess of love for the loan of her magic girdle,--

   “Her broidered cestus, wrought with every charm
    To win the heart; there Love, there young Desire,
    There fond Discourse, and there Persuasion dwelt,
    Which oft enthrals the mind of wisest men.”

It certainly enthrals the mind of the sovereign of Olympus; who, in all
cases where female attractions were concerned, was even as the most
foolish of mortals. Transfigured by the cestus of Venus, his queen
appears to him in a halo of celestial charms which are irresistible. In
her company he speedily forgets the wretched squabbles of the creatures
upon earth. Juno has bribed the god of sleep also to become her
accomplice; and the dread king is soon locked in profound repose.

Then Neptune seizes his opportunity, and heads the Greeks in person.
Agamemnon, disregarding his recent wound, is seen once more in the front
of the battle. Ajax meets Hector hand to hand, receives his spear full
in his breast just where his cross-belts meet, and so escapes unwounded.
As the Trojan prince draws back to recover himself, the giant Greek
upheaves a huge stone that has shored up one of the galleys, and hurls
it with main strength against his breast. “Like an oak of the forest
struck by lightning” Hector falls prone in the dust. With shouts of
exultation, Ajax and his comrades rush to crown their victory by
stripping his armour; but the great chiefs of the enemy,--Æneas,
Polydamas, the Lycian captains Sarpedon and Glaucus--gather round and
lock their shields in front of the fallen hero, while others bear him
aside out of the battle, still in a death-like swoon, to where his
chariot stands. Dismayed at the fall of their great leader, the Trojans
give ground; the trench is recrossed, and the Greeks breathe again.

Jupiter awakes from sleep just in time to see the mischief that has been
done; the Trojans in flight, the Greeks with Neptune at their head
pursuing; Hector lying senseless by the side of his chariot, still
breathing heavily, and vomiting blood from his bruised chest, and
surrounded by his anxious comrades. He turns wrathfully upon Juno--it is
her work, he knows. He reminds her of former penalties which she had
brought upon herself by deceiving him.

   “Hast thou forgotten how in former times
    I hung thee from on high, and to thy feet
    Attached two ponderous anvils, and thy hands
    With golden fetters bound which none might break?
    There didst thou hang amid the clouds of heaven:
    Through all Olympus’ breadth the gods were wroth;
    Yet dared not one approach to set thee free.” (D.)

He does not proceed, however, to exercise any such barbarous conjugal
discipline on this occasion, and is readily appeased by his queen’s
assurance that the interference of Neptune was entirely on his own
proper motion. He condescends even to explain why he desires to give a
temporary triumph to the Trojans: it is that, in accordance with his
sworn promise to Thetis, he may avenge the insult offered to her son
Achilles, by teaching the Greeks their utter helplessness without him.

The Goddess of the Rainbow is sent to warn Neptune, on pain of the
Thunderer’s displeasure, to quit the fight. The sea-king demurs. “Was
not a fair partition made, in the primeval days, between the three
brother-gods, of the realms of Air, and Sea, and Darkness? and is not
Earth common ground to all? Why is not Jupiter content with his own
lawful domains, and by what right does he assume to dictate to a
brother--and a brother-king?” Iris, however, calms him; he is perfectly
right in theory, she admits; but in practice he will find his elder
brother too strong for him. So the sea-god, in sulky acquiescence,
leaves the scene of battle, and plunges down into the depths of his own
dominion. Phœbus Apollo, on the other hand, receives Jupiter’s
permission to aid the Trojans. He sweeps down from Olympus to the spot
where Hector lies, now slowly reviving. The hero recognises his
celestial visitor, and feels at once his strength restored, and his
ardour for the battle reawakened. To the consternation of the Greeks, he
reappears in the field, fierce and vigorous as before. But he no longer
comes alone; in his front moves Phœbus Apollo,--

   “His shoulders veiled in cloud; his arm sustained
    The awful Ægis, dread to look on, hung
    With shaggy tassels round and dazzling bright,
    Which Vulcan, skilful workman, gave to Jove,
    To scatter terror ’mid the souls of men.” (D.)

When the sun-god flashes this in the faces of the Greeks, heart and
spirit fail them. Stalking in the van of the Trojans, he leads them up
once more against the embankment, and, planting his mighty foot upon
it, levels a wide space for the passage of the chariots,--

   “Easy, as when a child upon the beach,
    In wanton play, with hands and feet o’erthrows
    The mound of sand which late in sport he raised.”

The habits and pursuits of grown-up men change with the passing
generation; but the children of Homer’s day might play with our own, and
understand each other’s ways perfectly.

Chariots and footmen press through the breach pell-mell, and again the
battle rages round the Greek galleys. Standing on their high decks, the
Greeks maintain the struggle gallantly with the long boarding-pikes, as
we should call them, kept on board for use in such emergencies. Ajax’
galley is attacked by Hector in person; but the Greek chief stands
desperately at bay, wielding a huge pike thirty-three feet long, and his
brother Teucer plies his arrows with fatal effect upon the crowded
assailants: until Jupiter, alarmed lest Hector should be struck, snaps
his bowstring in sunder. Hector calls loudly for fire to burn the
vessels, and one warrior after another, torch in hand, makes the attempt
at the cost of his life, until twelve lie biting the sand, slain by the
huge weapon of Ajax.





THE DEATH OF PATROCLUS.


Patroclus, sitting in the tent of the wounded Eurypylus, sees the
imminent peril of his countrymen. He cannot bear the sight, and taking
hasty leave of his friend, hurries back to the quarters of Achilles, and
stands before him in an agony of silent tears. At first the hero affects
to chide his follower for such girlish sorrow--what cares he for the
Greeks? It is plain, however, that he does care; and when Patroclus, in
very outspoken terms, upbraids him for his obduracy, and asks that, even
if the dark doom that hangs over him makes his chief unwilling to take
the field in person, he will at least send him with the Myrmidons to the
rescue, Achilles at once consents. Patroclus shall go, clad in his
armour, that so perchance the Trojans may be deceived, and think that
they see the well-known crest of Achilles himself once more leading the
fight. Only he warns him not to advance too far; to be content with
rescuing the galleys, and not attempt to press his victory home to the
walls of Troy; in that case he will find the gods of the enemy turn
their wrath against him. In spite of his assumed indifference, Achilles
is intently watching the combatants in the distance, and sees the
flames rising in the air from the galley of Ajax. He can no longer
restrain his feelings, but hurries his comrade forth. Patroclus puts on
the harness of his chief, and takes his sword and shield: only the
mighty spear he forbears to touch;--

   “None save Achilles’ self that spear could poise,
    The far-famed Pelian ash, which to his sire,
    On Pelion’s summit felled, to be the bane
    Of mightiest chiefs, the centaur Chiron gave.”

He mounts the hero’s chariot, driven by the noble Automedon, and drawn
by the three horses, Xanthus, Balius, and Pedasus--or as we should call
them, Chestnut, Dapple, and Swift-foot. The battalions of the Myrmidons
eagerly gather round their leaders,--even old Phœnix taking command of
one detachment. Achilles himself gives them a few fiery words of
exhortation. “They have long chafed at their enforced idleness, and
clamoured for the battle; lo! there lies the opportunity they have
longed for.” Then, standing in the midst, he pours from his most costly
goblet the solemn libation to Jove, and prays of him for Patroclus
victory and a safe return. The poet tells us, with that licence of
prognostication which has been considerably abused by some modern
writers of fiction, that half the prayer was heard, and half denied.

“Like a pack of ravening wolves, hungering for their prey,” the
Myrmidons launch themselves against the enemy. The Trojans recognise, as
they believe, in the armed charioteer who heads them, the terrible
Achilles, and consternation spreads through their ranks. Even Hector,
though still fighting gallantly, is borne back over the stockade, and
the ditch is filled with broken chariots and struggling horses. Back
towards the Trojan lines rolls the tide of battle. Sarpedon, the great
Lycian chief, own son to Jupiter, falls by the spear of Patroclus. The
ruler of Olympus has hesitated for a while whether he shall interpose to
save him; but his fated term of life is come, and there is a mysterious
Destiny in this Homeric mythology, against which even Jupiter seems
powerless. All that he can do for his offspring is to insure for his
body the rites of burial; and by his order the twin brothers, Sleep and
Death, carry off the corpse to his native shore of Lycia.

But Patroclus has forgotten the parting caution of Achilles. Flushed
with his triumph, he follows up the pursuit even to the walls of Troy.
But there Apollo keeps guard. Thrice the Greek champion in defiance
smites upon the battlements, and thrice the god shakes the terrible Ægis
in his face. A fourth time the Greek lifts his spear, when an awful
voice warns him that neither for him, nor yet for his mightier master
Achilles, is it written in the fates to take Troy. Awe-struck, he draws
back from the wall, but only to continue his career of slaughter among
the Trojans. Apollo meets him in the field, strips from him his helmet
and his armour, and shivers his spear in his hand. The Trojan Euphorbus,
seeing him at this disadvantage, stabs him from behind, and Hector,
following him as he retreats, drives his spear through his body. As the
Trojan prince stands over his victim, exulting after the fashion of all
Homeric heroes in what seems to our taste a barbarous and boastful
spirit, Patroclus with his dying breath foretells that his slayer shall
speedily meet his own fate by the avenging hand of Achilles. Hector
spurns the prophecy, and rushes after the charioteer Automedon, whom
the immortal horses carry off safe from his pursuit. Then donning the
armour of Achilles, so lately worn by Patroclus, he leads on the Trojans
to seize the dead body, which Menelaus is gallantly defending. After a
long and desperate contest, the Greeks, locking their shields together
in close phalanx, succeed in carrying it off, the two Ajaxes keeping the
assailants at bay. Jupiter, in pity to the dead hero, casts a veil of
darkness round him. But this embarrasses the movements of friends as
well as enemies, and gives rise to a characteristic outburst on the part
of Ajax, often quoted. He can fight best when he sees his way. “Give us
but light, O Jove, and in the light, if thou seest fit, destroy us!”

We have now reached the crisis of the story. The wrath of Achilles
against Agamemnon wanes and pales before the far more bitter wrath which
now fills his whole soul against Hector, as the slayer of his comrade.
Young Antilochus, son of Nestor, brings the mournful tidings to his
tent, where he sits already foreboding the result, as he sees the Greeks
crowding back to their galleys from the field in front of Troy. His
grief is frantic--he tears his hair, and heaps dust upon his head, after
a fashion which strongly suggests the Eastern character of the tale. His
goddess-mother, Thetis “of the silver feet,” hears him,

   “Beside her aged father where she sat,
    In the deep ocean-caves,”

and comes with all her train of sea-nymphs to console him, as when
before he sat weeping with indignation at the insult of Agamemnon. In
vain she strives to comfort him with the thought that his insulted
honour has been fully satisfied--that the Greeks have bitterly rued
their former treatment of him. He feels only the loss of Patroclus, and
curses the hour in which he was born. All that he longs for now is
vengeance upon Hector. Thetis sorrowfully reminds him that it is written
in the book of fate that when Hector falls, his own last hour is near at
hand. Be it so, is his reply--death comes in turn to all men, and he
will meet it as he may. But he cannot go forth to battle without armour;
and the goddess promises that by the morrow’s dawn, Vulcan, the immortal
craftsman, shall furnish him with harness of proof.

The Greeks have fought their way to their vessels, step by step, with
the dead body of Patroclus. But Hector with his Trojans has pressed them
close all the way, and even when at the Greek lines seizes the corpse by
the feet. Iris flies to Achilles with a message from Juno--will he see
his dead friend given as a prey to the dogs and vultures?--He is without
armour, true; but there is no need for him to adventure himself among
the combatants; let him only show himself, let the Trojans but hear his
voice, and it is enough. He does so; standing aloft upon the rampart,
while Pallas throws her ægis over him, and surrounds his head with a
halo of flashing light, he lifts his mighty voice and thrice shouts
aloud. Panic seizes the whole host of Troy, and while they give ground
in dismay, the dead Patroclus is borne off to the tent of Achilles.

Night falls on the plain, and separates the combatants. The Trojans,
before their evening meal, hold an anxious council, in which Polydamas,
as great in debate as Hector is in the field, advises that they should
now retire within their walls. Achilles, it is evident, will head the
Greeks in the morning, and who shall stand before him? But the wise
counsel of Polydamas meets the same fate as that of Ahithophel; Heaven
will not suffer men to listen to it. Minerva perverts the understandings
of the Trojans, and they prefer the rasher exhortations of Hector, who
urges them at all hazards to keep the field.

Thetis, meanwhile, has sought out Vulcan, and bespoken his skill in the
forging of new armour for her son. The lame god will work for her, she
knows; for in the day when his cruel mother Juno, in wrath at his
marvellous ugliness, cast him down from Olympus, she with her
sister-goddess Eurynome had nursed him in their bosom till he grew
strong. She finds him now hard at work at his forges, in the brazen
halls which he has made for himself in heaven. He is completing at this
moment some marvellous machinery--twenty tripods mounted on wheels of
gold (the earliest hint of velocipedes), which are to move of
themselves, and carry him to and fro to the assembly of the gods.
Another marvel, too, is to be seen in the Fire-king’s establishment,
which has long been the desideratum of modern households, but which
modern mechanical science has as yet failed to invent--automaton
servants, worked by machinery.

   “In form as living maids, but wrought in gold,
    Instinct with consciousness, with voice endued,
    And strength, and skill from heavenly teachers drawn;
    These waited duteous at the monarch’s side.”

Willingly, at the request of the sea-goddess, Vulcan plies his immortal
art. Helmet with crest of gold, breastplate “brighter than the flash of
fire,” and the pliant greaves that mould themselves to the limb, are
soon completed. But the marvel of marvels is the shield. On this the
god bestows all his skill, and the, poet his most graphic description.
It is covered with figures of the most elaborate design, wrought in
brass, and tin, and gold, and silver. In its centre are the sun, the
moon, and all the host of heaven: round the rim flows the mighty
ocean-river, which in Homeric as in Eastern mythology encompasses the
earth; and on its embossed surface, crowded with figures, is embodied an
epitome of human life, such as life was in the days of Homer. The tale
is told in twelve compartments, containing each a scene of peace or war.
Three groups represent a city in time of peace: a wedding procession
with music and dancing, a dispute in the market-place, and a reference
to the judgment of the elders gathered in council. Three represent a
city in time of war: a siege, an ambuscade, and a battle. Then follow
three scenes of outdoor country life: ploughing, the harvest, and the
vintage. The lord of the harvest stands looking on at his reapers, like
Boaz. In the vintage scene, the art of the immortal workman is minutely
described. The vines are wrought in gold, the props are of silver, the
grape-bunches are of a purple black, and there is a trench round of some
dark-hued metal, crowned by a palisade of bright tin. Three pastoral
groups complete the circle. First, a herd of oxen with herdsmen and
their dogs, attacked by lions; secondly, flocks feeding in a deep
valley, with the folds and shepherds’ huts in the distance; and lastly,
a festival dance of men and maidens in holiday attire, with the “divine
bard,” without whom no festival is complete, singing his lays to his
harp in the midst, and two gymnasts performing their feats for the
amusement of the crowd of lookers-on. If any reader should have imagined
that Homer’s song of (it may be) three thousand years ago was rude and
inartistic, he has but to read, in the version of any of our best
translators, this description of the Shield of Achilles, to be convinced
that the poet understood his work to the full as well as the immortal
craftsman whom he represents as having wrought it. We need not trouble
ourselves with the difficulty of that French critic, who doubted whether
so many subjects could really be represented on any shield of manageable
size--like Goldsmith’s rustics who marvelled, in the case of the village
schoolmaster,

    “That one small head could carry all he knew.”

It is only necessary to point to the clever design of Flaxman for its
realisation, and its actual embodiment (with the moderate diameter of
three feet) in the shield cast by Pitts.






THE RETURN OF ACHILLES.


With a fierce delight Achilles gazes on the work of the Olympian
armourer, before the dazzling brightness of which even the Myrmidons
veil their faces. He sets forth at once for the tents of Agamemnon; and,
taking his way along the shore, calls the leaders to battle as he passes
each man’s galley. The news of his coming spreads fast and far, and
every man, from the highest to the lowest, even those who never quitted
the ship on any other occasion--

   “The steersmen who the vessels’ rudders hold,
    The very stewards who served the daily bread”--

flock to the central rendezvous to welcome back the champion of the
Achæans. He is as impulsive and outspoken in his reconciliation as in
his wrath. There is no need of mediation now between himself and
Agamemnon. He accosts the king with a noble simplicity:

   “Great son of Atreus, what hath been the gain
    To thee or me, since heart-consuming strife
    Hath fiercely raged between us, for a girl--
    Who would to heaven had died by Dian’s shafts
    That day when from Lyrnessus’ captured town
    I bore her off, so had not many a Greek
    Bitten the bloody dust, by hostile hands
    Subdued, while I in anger stood aloof.
    Great was the gain to Troy; but Greece, methinks,
    Will long retain the memory of our feud.
    Yet pass we that; and though our hearts be sore,
    Still let us school our angry spirits down.
    My wrath I here abjure.” (D.)

Agamemnon, for his part, magnanimously admits his error; laying the
chief blame, however, upon Jupiter and Fate, who blinded the eyes of his
understanding. The peace-offerings are produced and accepted, though
Achilles only chafes at anything which can delay his vengeance. Ulysses
strongly urges the necessity of a substantial meal for the whole army;

   “For none throughout the day till set of sun,
    Fasting from food, may bear the toils of war;
    His spirit may be eager for the fray,
    Yet are his limbs by slow degrees weighed down.”

Achilles schools himself into patience while the rest act upon this
prosaic but prudent counsel; but for himself, he will neither eat nor
drink, nor wash his blood-stained hands, till he has avenged the death
of his comrade. So he sits apart in his grief, while the rest are at the
banquet: Minerva, by Jupiter’s command, infusing into his body ambrosia
and nectar, to sustain his strength. Another true mourner is Briseis.
The first sight which meets the captive princess on her return to the
Myrmidon camp is the bloody corpse of Patroclus. She throws herself upon
it in an agony of tears. He, in the early days of her captivity, had
spoken kind and cheering words, and had been a friend in time of
trouble. So, too, Menelaus briefly says of him--“He knew how to be kind
to all men.” This glimpse which the poet gives us of the gentler
features of the dead warrior’s character is touching enough, when we
remember the utter disregard of an enemy’s or a captive’s feelings shown
not only by Homer’s heroes, but by those of the older Jewish Scriptures.

When all is ready for the battle, Achilles dons the armour of Vulcan,
and draws from its case the Centaur’s gift,--the ashen spear of Mount
Pelion, which even Patroclus, it will be remembered, had not ventured to
take in hand. Thus armed, he mounts his chariot, drawn by the two
immortal steeds, Xanthus and Balius--for their mortal yoke-fellow had
been slain in the battle in which Patroclus fell. As he mounts, in the
bitter spirit which leads him to blame the whole world for the death of
his friend, he cannot forbear a taunt to his horses--he trusts they will
not leave him on the field, as they left Patroclus. Then the chestnut,
inspired by Juno, for once finds a human voice, and exculpates himself
and his comrade. It was no fault of theirs; it was the doom of
Patroclus, and Achilles’ own doom draws nigh. This day they will bring
him back in safety; but the end is at hand.

Unlike Hector, Achilles knows and foresees his doom clearly; but, like
Hector, he will meet it unflinchingly. Pope’s version of his reply is
deservedly admired. Xanthus has uttered his warning;

   “Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
    His fateful voice. Th’ intrepid chief replied
    With unabated rage--‘So let it be!
    Portents and prodigies are lost on me;
    I know my fate; to die, to see no more
    My much-loved parents and my native shore;
    Enough--when Heaven ordains, I sink in night;
    Now perish Troy!’ he said, and rushed to fight.”

In the renewed battle which ensues, the gods, by express permission of
their sovereign, take part. Juno, Neptune, Minerva, Mercury, and Vulcan
assist the Greeks: Mars, Venus, Apollo, Latona, and Diana join the
Trojans. Their interference seems, at least to our modern taste, to
assist in no way the action of the poem, and merely tends to weaken for
the time the human interest. We must be content to assume that upon a
Greek audience the impression was different. The only effect which these
immortal allies produce upon the fortunes of the day is a negative one;
Apollo incites Æneas to encounter Achilles, and when he is in imminent
danger, Neptune conveys him away in a mist. Apollo performs the same
office for Hector, who also engages the same terrible adversary, in the
hope of avenging upon him the death of his young brother Polydorus.
Disappointed in both his greater antagonists, Achilles vents his wrath
in indiscriminate slaughter. Driving through the disordered host of the
Trojans, his chariot wheels and axle steeped in blood, he cuts the mass
of fugitives in two, and drives part of them into the shallows of the
river Scamander. Leaping down from his chariot, he wades into the river,
and there continues his career of slaughter, sword in hand. Twelve
Trojan youths he takes alive and hands them over to his followers;
sparing them for the present only to slay them hereafter as victims at
the funeral-pile to appease the shade of Patroclus. Another suppliant
for his mercy has a singular history. The young Lycaon, one of the many
sons of Priam, had been taken prisoner by him in one of his raids upon
Trojan territory, and sold as a slave in Lemnos. He had been ransomed
there and sent home to Troy, only twelve days before he fell into his
enemy’s hands again here in the bed of the Scamander. Achilles
recognises him, and cruelly taunts him with his reappearance: the dead
Trojans whom he has slain will surely next come to life again, if the
captives thus cross the seas to swell the ranks of his enemies. In vain
Lycaon pleads for his life, that he is not the son of the same mother as
Hector--that his brother Polydorus has just been slain, which may well
content the Greek’s vengeance. There is a gloomy irony in the words with
which Achilles rejects his prayer. Before Patroclus fell, he had spared
many a Trojan; but henceforth, all appeal to his mercy is vain--most of
all from a son of Priam. But, in fact, the wish to escape one’s fate he
holds to be utterly unreasonable;

   “Thou too, my friend, must die--why vainly wail?
    Dead is Patroclus too, thy better far--
    Me too thou seest, how stalwart, tall, and fair,
    Of noble sire and goddess-mother born,
    Yet must I yield to death and stubborn fate,
    Whene’er, at morn or noon or eve, the spear
    Or arrow from the bow may reach my life.” (D.)

At last the great river-god--whom the gods call Xanthus, but men
Scamander--rises in his might, indignant at seeing his stream choked
with corpses, and stained with blood. He hurls the whole force of his
waves against Achilles, and the hero is fain to save himself by grasping
an elm that overhangs the bank, and so swinging himself to land. But
here Scamander pursues him, and, issuing from his banks, rolls in a
deluge over the plain. Even the soul of Achilles is terror-stricken at
this new aspect of death. Is he to die thus, like some vile churl--

    “Borne down in crossing by a wintry brook?”

Neptune and Minerva appear to encourage him, and give him strength to
battle with the flood: and when Scamander summons his brother-river
Simois to his aid, Vulcan sends flames that scorch all the river-banks,
consuming the trees and shrubs that clothe them, and threatening to dry
up the very streams themselves. The river yields, and retires to his
banks, leaving Achilles free to pursue his victories. He drives the
Trojans inside their walls, and but that Apollo guards the gates, would
have entered the city in hot pursuit. Hector alone remains without--his
doom is upon him.

The gods, meanwhile, have entered the field of battle on their own
account, and contributed, as before, a ludicrous element to the action
of the poem. Minerva fells Mars the war-god to the ground with a huge
mass of rock, an ancient landmark, which she hurls against him; and he
lies covering “above seven hundred feet,” till Venus comes to his aid to
lead him from the field, when the terrible goddess strikes her to the
earth beside him. Juno shows the strength of those “white arms” which
the poet always assigns to her, by a terrible buffet which she bestows,
for no particular reason apparently, upon Diana, who drops her bow and
loses her arrows, and flies weeping to her father Jupiter. He, for his
part, has been watching the quarrels of his court and family with a
dignified amusement;--

   “Jove as his sport the dreadful scene descries,
    And views contending gods with careless eyes.” (P.)

Those philosophers who see a moral allegory in the whole of the Homeric
story, have supplied us with a key to the conduct and feelings of
Jupiter during this curious combat. “Jupiter, as the lord of nature, is
well pleased with the war of the gods--that is, of earth, sea, air,
&c.--because the harmony of all beings arises from that discord. Thus
heat and cold, moist and dry, are in a continual war, yet upon this
depends the fertility of the earth and the beauty of the creation. So
that Jupiter, who, according to the Greeks, is the soul of all, may well
be said to smile at this contention.”[20] Those readers who may not be
satisfied with this solution must be content to take the burlesque as it
stands.





THE DEATH OF HECTOR.


Hector remains alone outside the Scæan gate, awaiting his great enemy.
In vain his aged father and mother from the walls entreat him to take
shelter within, like the rest of his countrymen. He will not meet the
just reproach of Polydamas, whose prudent counsel he rejected. The
deaths of his friends who have fallen in this terrible battle, which he
had insisted upon their risking, hang heavy on his soul. He, at least,
will do what he may for Troy. Yet he has no confidence in the result of
the encounter. If he were only sure that Achilles would listen, he would
even now offer to restore Helen, and so end this disastrous war. But he
feels it is too late; vengeance alone will now content Achilles.

   “Not this the time, nor he the man with whom
    By forest oak or rock, like youth and maid,
    To hold light talk as youth and maid might hold.
    Better to dare the fight, and know at once
    For whom the vict’ry is decreed by Heaven.”

Achilles draws near. The courage which has never failed Hector before,
wholly deserts him now; he turns and flies, “like a dove from the
falcon.” Judged by any theory of modern heroism, his conduct is simply
indefensible. Critics tell us that the poet, in order to enhance the
glory of his chief hero, makes even the champion of Troy fear to face
him. But it is no compliment, in our modern eyes, to a victorious
warrior, to have it explained that his crowning victory was won over a
coward. Yet perhaps there was something of this feeling maintained even
by Englishmen in days not so very long gone by, when it was the popular
fashion to represent Frenchmen generally, and the great French general
in particular, as always running away from the English bayonets.
However, to Homer’s public it was evidently not incongruous or
derogatory to the heroic type of character, that sudden panic should
seize even the bravest in the presence of superior force. Hector, as has
been said, turns and flies for his life.

Thrice round the walls of the city, his friends looking on in horror at
the terrible race, he flies, with Achilles in pursuit. In each course he
tries to reach the gates, that his comrades may either open to him, or
at least cover him by launching their missiles from the walls against
his enemy. But still Achilles turns him back towards the plain, signing
to the Greeks to hurl no spear, nor to interfere in any way with his
single vengeance. The gods look down from Olympus with divided interest.
Jupiter longs to save him; but Minerva sternly reminds him of the dread
destiny--the Eternal Law--which even the Ruler of Olympus is bound to
reverence. Once more he lifts in heaven the golden scales, and finds
that Hector’s fate weighs down the balance. Then, at last, his guardian
Apollo leaves him. Minerva, on her part, comes to the aid of her
favourite Achilles with a stratagem, as little worthy of his renown (to
our view) as the sudden panic of Hector. She appears by the side of the
Trojan hero in the likeness of his brother Deiphobus, and bids him stand
and fight; they two, together, must surely be a match for Achilles.
Hector turns and challenges his adversary. One compact he tries to make,
in a few hurried words, before they encounter; let each promise, since
one must fall, to restore the dead body of his enemy in all honour to
his kindred. Achilles makes no reply but this:--

   “Talk not to me of compacts; as ’tween men
    And lions no firm concord can exist,
    Nor wolves and lambs in harmony unite,
    But ceaseless enmity between them dwells:
    So not in friendly terms, nor compact firm,
    Can thou and I unite, till one of us
    Glut with his blood the mail-clad warrior Mars.
    Mind thee of all thy fence; behoves thee now
    To prove a spearman skilled, and warrior brave.
    For thee escape is none; now, by my spear,
    Hath Pallas doomed thy death: my comrade’s blood,
    Which thou hast shed, shall all be now avenged.” (D.)

The spear launched with these words misses its mark: that of Hector
strikes full in the centre of his enemy’s shield, but it glances
harmlessly off from the fire-god’s workmanship. He looks round for
Deiphobus to hand him another; but the false Deiphobus has vanished,
and, too late, Hector detects the cruel deceit of the goddess. He will
die at least as a hero should. He draws his sword, and rushes on
Achilles. The wary Greek eyes him carefully as he comes on, and spies
the joint in his harness where the breastplate meets the throat. Through
that fatal spot he drives his spear, and the Trojan falls to the ground
mortally wounded, but yet preserving the power of speech. As his
conqueror stands over him cruelly vaunting, and vowing to give his body
to the dogs and to the vultures, he makes a last appeal to his mercy.
“By the heads of his parents” he beseeches him to spare this last
indignity; the ransom which his father Priam will offer shall be ample
for one poor corpse. But the wrath of Achilles has become for the
present mere savage madness. Neither prayer nor ransom shall avail in
this matter. Hector’s last words are prophetic:--

          “I know thee well, nor did I hope
    To change thy purpose; iron is thy soul.
    But see that on thy head I bring not down
    The wrath of heaven, when by the Scæan gate
    The hand of Paris, with Apollo’s aid,
    Brave warrior as thou art, shall strike thee down.” (D.)

The only glimpse of nobility which Achilles shows throughout the whole
scene is in his stoical answer:--

   “Die thou! my fate I then shall meet, whene’er
    Jove and th’ immortal gods shall so decree.”

What follows is mere brutality. The Greeks crowd round, and drive their
weapons into the senseless body.

   “And one to other looked, and said, ‘Good faith,
    Hector is easier far to handle now,
    Than when erewhile he wrapped our ships in fire.’”

Does it need here to do more than recall the too well remembered
sequel--how the savage victor pierced the heels of his dead enemy, and
so fastened the body to his chariot, and dragged him off to his ships,
in full sight of his agonised parents? how

   “A cloud of dust the trailing body raised;
    Loose hung his glossy hair; and in the dust
    Was laid that noble head, so graceful once.”

Or how the miserable Priam, grovelling on the floor of his palace,
besought his weeping friends to suffer him to rush out of the gates, and
implore the mercy of the merciless Achilles? Less horrible, if not less
piteous, is the picture of Andromache:--

                        “To her no messenger
    Had brought the tidings, that without the walls
    Remained her husband; in her house withdrawn,
    A web she wove, all purple, double woof,
    With varied flowers in rich embroidery,
    And to her neat-haired maids she gave command
    To place the largest caldrons on the fires,
    That with warm baths, returning from the fight,
    Hector might be refreshed; unconscious she,
    That by Achilles’ hand, with Pallas’ aid,
    Far from the bath, was godlike Hector slain.
    The sounds of wailing reached her from the tower.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Then from the house she rushed, like one distract,
    With beating heart; and with her went her maids.
    But when the tower she reached, where stood the crowd,
    And mounted on the wall, and looked around,
    And saw the body trailing in the dust,
    Which the fleet steeds were dragging to the ships,
    A sudden darkness overspread her eyes;
    Backward she fell, and gasped her spirit away.
    Far off were flung th’ adornments of her head,
    The net, the fillet, and the woven bands;
    The nuptial veil by golden Venus given,
    That day when Hector of the glancing helm
    Led from Eëtion’s house his wealthy bride.
    The sisters of her husband round her pressed,
    And held, as in the deadly swoon she lay.” (D.)

The body is dragged off to the ships, and flung in the dust in front of
the bier on which Patroclus lies. And now, at last, when he has been
fully avenged, the due honours shall be paid to his beloved remains,
while the dogs and vultures feast on those of Hector. Thrice in slow
procession, with a mournful chant, the Myrmidons lead their horses
round the bier. While Achilles sleeps the deep sleep of exhaustion after
the long day’s battle, the shade of his dead friend appears to him, and
chides him for leaving him so long unburied, a wandering ghost in the
gloom below.

   “Sleep’st thou, Achilles, mindless of thy friend,
    Neglecting not the living, but the dead?
    Hasten my fun’ral rites, that I may pass
    Through Hades’ gloomy gates; ere those be done,
    The spirits and spectres of departed men
    Drive me far from them, nor allow to cross
    Th’ abhorred river; but forlorn and sad
    I wander through the widespread realms of night.
    And give me now thy hand, whereon to weep;
    For never more, when laid upon the pyre,
    Shall I return from Hades; never more,
    Apart from all our comrades, shall we two,
    As friends, sweet counsel take; for me, stern Death,
    The common lot of man, has ope’d his mouth;
    Thou too, Achilles, rival of the gods,
    Art destined here beneath the walls of Troy
    To meet thy doom; yet one thing must I add,
    And make, if thou wilt grant it, one request:
    Let not my bones be laid apart from thine,
    Achilles, but together, as our youth
    Was spent together in thy father’s house.” (D.)

As eager now to do honour to Achilles as he was before to insult him,
Agamemnon has despatched a strong force at early dawn to cut down wood
for a huge funeral pile. The burial rites are grandly savage. In long
procession and in full panoply the Myrmidons bear the dead hero to the
pile, and the corpse is covered with the long locks of hair which every
warrior in turn, Achilles first, cuts off as an offering to the gods
below. Four chariot-horses, and two dogs “that had fed at their master’s
board,” are slain upon the pile, to follow him, in case he should have
need of them, into the dark and unknown country: and last, the twelve
Trojan captives, according to his barbarous vow, are slaughtered by
Achilles in person, and laid upon the pile. The winds of heaven are
solemnly invoked to fan the flames, which roar and blaze all night; and
all night Achilles pours copious libations of wine from a golden goblet.
With wine also the embers are quenched in the morning, and the bones of
Patroclus are carefully collected and placed in a golden urn, to await
the day, which Achilles foresees close at hand, when they shall be
buried under one mound with his own.

There follow the funeral games. First, the chariot-race, in which Diomed
carries off an easy victory with the Trojan horses which he captured
from Æneas. An easy victory, because the goddess Minerva not only breaks
the pole of Eumelus, his most formidable rival, but hands Diomed back
his whip when he drops it: interpreted by our realistic critics to mean,
that prudence bids him take a second whip as a reserve. The old
“horse-tamer,” Nestor, gives his son Antilochus such cunning directions,
that he comes in second, though his horses are confessedly the slowest
of the whole field. Next comes the battle with the cœstus--that
barbarous form of boxing-glove, which, far from deadening the force of
the blow delivered, made it more damaging and dangerous, inasmuch as the
padding consisted of thongs of raw ox-hide well hardened. The combat in
this case is very unequal, since the giant Epeius speedily fells his
younger and lighter antagonist, who is carried almost senseless from the
lists. The wrestlers are better matched; the skill and subtlety of
Ulysses are a counterpoise to the huge bulk and somewhat inactive
strength of Ajax, who lifts his opponent off his feet with ease, but is
brought to the ground himself by a dexterous kick upon the ancle-joint.
Another fall, in which neither has the advantage, leads to the dividing
of the prize--though how it was to be divided practically is not so
clear, since the first prize was a tripod valued at twelve oxen, and the
second a female captive, reckoned to be worth four.[21] The foot-race is
won by Ulysses, Minerva interfering for the second time to secure the
victory for her favourite, by tripping up the lesser Ajax (son of
Oileus), who was leading. The Greek poet does but refer what we should
call an unlucky accident to the agency of heaven. A single combat on
foot, with shield and spear, succeeds, the prize for which is the rich
armour of which Patroclus had spoiled Sarpedon. He who first draws blood
is to be the winner. Diomed and Ajax Telamon step into the lists, and
the combat between the two great champions grows so fierce and hot, that
the spectators insist on their being separated, and again the honours
are adjudged to be equal; although Diomed, who was clearly getting the
advantage, receives the chief portion of the divided prize. In the
quoit-throwing Ajax is beaten easily; and critics have remarked that in
no single contest does the poet allow him, though a favourite with the
army, to be successful. Those who insist upon the allegorical view of
the poem, tell us that the lesson is, that brute force is of little
avail without counsel. The archers’ prizes are next contended for, and
we have the original of the story which has been borrowed, with some
modifications, by many imitators from Virgil’s time downwards, and
figures in the history of the English ‘Clym of the Clough,’ and Tell of
Switzerland. Teucer, reputed the most skilful bowman in the whole host,
only shoots near enough to cut the cord which ties the dove to the mast,
while Meriones follows the bird with his aim as she soars far into the
air, and brings her down, pierced through and through, with his arrow.
But Meriones had vowed an offering to Apollo “of the silver bow,” which
Teucer, in the pride of his heart, had neglected. The games are closed
with hurling the spear, when the king Agamemnon himself, desirous to pay
all honour to his great rival’s grief, steps into the arena as a
competitor. With no less grace and dignity Achilles accepts the
compliment, but forbids the contest. “O son of Atreus, we know thou dost
far surpass us all”--and he hands the prize for his acceptance.

The anger against Agamemnon is past: but not so the savage wrath against
Hector. Combined with his passionate grief for Patroclus, it amounts to
madness. Morning after morning he rises from the restless couch where he
has lain thinking of his friend, and lashing the dead corpse afresh to
his chariot, drags it furiously thrice round the mound that covers
Patroclus’ ashes. Twelve days has the body now lain unburied; but Venus
and Apollo preserve it from decay. Venus sheds over it ambrosial roseate
unguents, and Apollo covers it with a dark cool cloud. In less
mythological language, the loathliness of death may not mar its beauty,
nor the sunbeams breed in it corruption. Even the Olympians are seized
with horror and pity. In spite of the remonstrances of his still
implacable queen, Jupiter instructs Thetis to visit her son. and soften
his cruel obduracy. At the same time he sends Iris to Priam, and
persuades him to implore Achilles in person to restore the body of his
son. Accompanied by a single herald, and bearing a rich ransom, the aged
king passes the Greek lines by night (for Mercury himself becomes his
guide, disguised in the form of a Greek straggler, and casts a deep
sleep upon the sentinels). He reaches the tent of Achilles, who has just
ended his evening meal, throws himself at his feet, and kisses “the
dreadful murderous hands by which so many of his sons have fallen,” in
an agony of supplication. He adjures the conqueror, by the thought of
his own aged father Peleus--now looking and longing for his return--to
have some pity on a bereaved old man, whose son can never return to him
alive; and at least to give him back the body.

   “And for thy father’s sake look pitying down
    On me, more needing pity: since I bear
    Such grief as never man on earth hath borne,
    Who stoop to kiss the hand that slew my son.”

With the impulsive suddenness which is a part of his character, Achilles
gives way at once--prepared, indeed, to yield, by his mother’s
remonstrances. He gives orders to have the body clothed in costly
raiment, and washed and anointed by the handmaidens; nay, even lifts his
dead enemy with his own hands, and lays him on a couch. Yet he will not
let Priam as yet look upon the corpse, lest at the sight of his grief
his own passion should break out afresh. The father spends the night in
the tent of his son’s slayer, and there he closes his eyes in sleep for
the first time since the day of Hector’s death. In the morning he
returns to Troy with his mournful burden, and the funeral rites of
Hector close the poem. The boon which Achilles has granted he makes
complete by the spontaneous offer of twelve days’ truce, that so Troy
may bury her dead hero with his rightful honours. The wailings of Priam
and Hecuba, though naturally expressed, are but commonplace compared
with the last tribute of the remorseful Helen:--

   “Hector, of all my brethren dearest thou!
    True, godlike Paris claims me as his wife,
    Who bore me hither--would I then had died!
    But twenty years have passed since here I came,
    And left my native land; yet ne’er from thee
    I heard one scornful, one degrading word;
    And when from others I have borne reproach,
    Thy brothers, sister, or thy brothers’ wives,
    Or mother (for thy sire was ever kind
    Even as a father), thou hast checked them still
    With tender feeling and with gentle words.
    For thee I weep, and for myself no less,
    For through the breadth of Troy none love me now,
    None kindly look on me, but all abhor.” (D.)






CONCLUDING REMARKS.


The character of Hector has been very differently estimated. Modern
writers upon Homer generally assume that the ancient bard had, as it
were, a mental picture of all his great heroes before him, of their
inner as well as of their outer man, and worked from this in the various
acts and speeches which he has assigned to each. Probably nothing could
be further from the truth. If the poet could be questioned as to his
immortal work, and required to give a detailed character of each of his
chief personages, such as his modern admirers present us with, he would
most likely confess that such character as his heroes possess was built
up by degrees, as occasion called for them to act and speak, and that
his own portraits (where they were not derived from the current
traditions) rested but little upon any preconceived ideal. It is very
difficult to estimate character at all in a work of fiction in which the
principles of conduct are in many respects so different from those of
our own age. How far even the ablest critics have succeeded in the
attempt in the case of Hector may be judged from this; that whereas
Colonel Mure speaks of “a turn for vainglorious boasting” as his
characteristic defect,[22] Mr Froude remarks that “while Achilles is all
pride, Hector is all modesty.”[23] Both criticisms are from writers of
competent taste and judgment; but both cannot possibly be true. There
can be no doubt that Hector makes a considerable number of vaunting
speeches in the course of the poem--vaunts which he does not always
carry out; but in this respect he differs rather in degree than in
principle from most of the other warriors, Greek as well as Trojan; and
if the boasts of Achilles are always made good, while Hector’s often
come to nothing, that follows almost necessarily from the fact that
Achilles is the hero of the tale. A boastful tongue and a merciless
spirit are attributes of the heroic character in Homer: his heroes bear
a singular resemblance in these two points to the “braves” of the
American Indians; while they are utterly unlike them in their
sensitiveness to physical pain, their undisguised horror of death, and
their proneness to give loud expression to both feelings. Without
attempting to sketch a full-length portrait, which probably Homer
himself would not recognise, it may be said that Hector interests us
chiefly because he is far more human than Achilles, in his weakness as
well as in his strength; his honest love for his wife and child, his
pitying condonation of Helen, his half-contemptuous kindness to his weak
brother Paris, his hearty and unselfish devotion to his country.
Achilles is the “hero,” indeed, in the classical sense--_i.e._, he is
the demi-god, superior to many of the mortal weaknesses which are
palpable enough in the character of his antagonist: as little
susceptible to Hector’s alternations of confidence and panic, as to his
tender anxieties about his wife and child. The contrast between the two
is very remarkable; as strong, though of quite a different kind, as that
between the two chief female characters in the poem--Helen, charming
even in her frailty, attracting us and compelling our admiration in
spite of our moral judgment; Andromache, the blameless wife and mother,
whose charm is the beauty of true womanhood, and whose portrait, as
drawn by the poet, bears strong witness by its sweetness and purity to
the essential soundness of the domestic relations in the age which he
depicts.

The poem, as we have seen, ends somewhat abruptly. We learn nothing from
it of the fate of Troy, except so far as we have been taught throughout
the tale that the fortunes of the city and people depended wholly upon
Hector. “Achilles’ wrath” was the theme of the song, and now that this
has been appeased, we wait for no further catastrophe. Yet, if Achilles
has been the hero, it is remarkable that the poet’s parting sympathies
appear to rest, as those of the reader almost certainly will, with
Hector. It would seem that Homer himself felt something of what he makes
Jupiter express with regard to the Trojans--“They interest me, though
they must needs perish.” The Trojan hero must fall, or the glory of the
Greek could not be consummated; but the last words of the poem, as they
record his funeral honours, so they express the poet’s regretful
eulogy:--

    “Such honours paid they to the good knight Hector.”

Virgil, in his Æneid, naturally exalts the glory of Hector, because it
was his purpose to trace the origin of the Romans from Troy; but we
need not wonder that in later days, when the Homeric legends were worked
up into tales of Christian chivalry, Hector, and not Achilles, became
the model of a Christian knight. When the great Italian poet drew his
character of Orlando, as a type of chivalry, he had the Trojan hero in
his mind.

One of the earliest and most curious travesties of the Iliad--for it is
hardly more, though made in all good faith, according to the taste of
the times--was the work of an English troubadour, Benedict de St Maur,
of the time of Henry II. It was reproduced, as a prose romance, in
Latin, by Guido de Colonna, a Sicilian; but is better known--so far as
it can be said to be known at all--as the ‘History of the Warres of the
Greeks and Trojans,’ by John Lydgate, monk of Bury St Edmunds, first
printed in 1513. The writer professedly takes Colonna as his original.
The heroes of the Iliad reappear as the knights of modern chivalry; they
fight on horseback, observe all the rules of medieval courtesy, and
“fewtre their speres” at each other exactly in the style of the
Companions of the Round Table. Agamemnon is very like Arthur, and
Achilles Sir Lancelot, under other names. But Hector is here also
plainly the favourite hero. Thersites figures as a dwarf, with all the
malice and mischief peculiar, and in some degree permitted, to those
imaginary types of humanity. The closing lines of Lydgate’s third book
will give some idea of the strange transformation which Homer’s story
undergoes in the hands of our medieval poet, and is a curious instance
of the way in which the zealous churchman “improves” his pagan subject.
He is describing the funeral rites of Hector:--

   “And when Priam in full thrifty wyse
    Performed hath as ye have heard devyse,
    Ordained eke, as Guido[24] can you tell,
    A certain nombre of priestes for to dwell
    In the temple in their devotions,
    Continually with devout orisons
    For the soule of Hector for to pray.

           *       *       *       *       *

    To which priestes the kyng gave mansyons,
    There to abide, and possessyons,
    The which he hath to them mortysed
    Perpetually, as ye have heard devysed,
    And while they kneel, pray, and wake,
    I caste fully me an end to make
    Finally of this my thirde booke
    On my rude manner as I undertooke.”

The way in which the Homeric characters are modernised in Chaucer and
Dryden, and even in Shakspeare’s ‘Troilus and Cressida,’ is a deviation
from their originals hardly more excusable, though less absurd, than
this of Lydgate’s. They copied, in fact, not from the original at all,
but from the medieval corruptions of it. Racine’s tragedies are in a
higher vein, and his Iphigenia, though not Homer’s story, does more
justice to some of Homer’s characters: but after all, as has been well
observed, “they are dressed in the Parisian fashions, with speech and
action accordingly.”[25]

The Iliad, as has been already remarked, closes more abruptly than its
modern title would seem to justify, for the Tale of Troy is left half
untold. Imitators of the great bard followed him, and though their works
are lost to us, the legends upon which they worked have been reproduced
by later writers. The poems once known as the ‘Little Iliad’ and the
‘Sacking of Troy’ have left little more than their names, and some few
fragments which, do not raise much regret for the loss of the
remainder; but the leading events of which they treated are preserved in
the works of the Greek dramatists and of Virgil. It may not be out of
place here to sketch briefly the sequel to Homer’s story.

Troy fell in that tenth year of the siege, though new and remarkable
allies came to the aid of Priam. From the far north of Thrace came a
band of Amazons--women-warriors who, in spite of their weaker sex,
proved more than a match in battle for the men of Greece. Their queen
Penthesilea was said to be the daughter of the War-god; and under her
leading, once more the Trojans tried their fortune in the open field,
not unsuccessfully, until she too fell by the spear of Achilles.
Proceeding to possess himself of her helmet, as the conqueror’s spoil,
he was struck with her remarkable beauty, and stood entranced for some
moments in sorrow and admiration. It is the scene from which Tasso
borrows his story of Clorinda, and which Spenser had in his mind when he
makes Sir Artegal, after having unhelmed the fair Britomart in combat,
let fall his sword at the sight of her “angel-face”--

   “His powerless hand, benumbed with secret fear,
    From his revengefull purpose shronke abacke,
    And cruel sword out of his fingers slacke
    Fell down to ground, as if the steel had sence
    And felt some ruth, or sence his hand did lacke,
    Or both of them did think obedience
    To doe to so divine a Beautie’s excellence.”
            --B. IV. c. vi. st. 21.

Thersites--who had by this time forgotten the chastisement inflicted on
him by Ulysses for his scurrilous tongue--ventured a jest upon Achilles’
sensibility, and was struck dead by a blow from the hero’s unarmed
hand. Next came upon the scene the tall Ethiopian Memnon, son of the
Dawn, a warrior of more than mortal beauty, sent either from Egypt or
from the king of Assyria (for the legends vary), with a contingent of
fierce negro warriors, who carried slaughter into the Greek ranks, until
Memnon too fell by the hand of the same irresistible antagonist. These
were only brief respites for the doomed city. But it was not to fall by
the hand of Achilles. Before its day of destruction came, the Greek hero
had met with the fate which he himself foresaw--which had been
prophesied for him alike by his mother the sea-goddess, by the wondrous
utterance of his horse Xanthus, and by the dying words of Hector. An
arrow from Paris found the single vulnerable spot in his right heel, and
stretched him where he had slain his Trojan enemy--before the Scæan
gate. But his death, according to the legends, was no more like that of
common mortals than his life had been. He does not go down into those
gloomy regions where the ghosts of his friend Patroclus and his enemy
Hector wander. It was not death, but a translation. The Greeks had
prepared for him a magnificent funeral pile, but the body of the hero
suddenly disappeared. His mother Thetis conveyed it away to the island
of Leukè in the Euxine Sea, to enjoy in that seclusion a new and
perpetual life. So early is the legend which the romance of Christendom
adopted for so many of its favourites--notably for the English Arthur,
borne by the three mysterious queens to

    “The island valley of Avilion,”

where, it was long said and believed, he lay either in a charmed sleep
or a passionless immortality. One legend ran that the Greek hero, in his
happy island, was favoured with the society of Helen, whose matchless
beauty he had much desired to see.

His wondrous shield and armour--the masterpieces of Vulcan--were left by
Thetis as a prize for “the bravest of the Greeks,” and became almost as
fatal a source of discord as the golden apple which had been labelled
for “the fairest.” Ulysses and Ajax were the most distinguished
claimants, and when, as before, counsel was preferred to strength, Ajax
went mad with vexation, and fell upon his own sword. Ulysses handed on
the coveted armour to its rightful inheritor, the young Neoptolemus, son
of Achilles, who, in accordance with an oracle, had been sent for to
take Troy. Still the city held out, secure so long as the sacred image
of Minerva, the “Palladium,” a gift from Jupiter himself, remained in
the citadel: until Ulysses broke the spell by entering within the walls
in disguise, and carrying it off. One quick eye discovered the venturous
Greek, through his rags and self-inflicted wounds: Helen recognised him;
but she was weary of her guilty life, and became an excusable traitress
in favour of her lawful husband. It was again the fertile brain of
Ulysses which conceived the stratagem of the wooden horse; and when the
curiosity of the Trojans (against all ordinary probabilities, it must be
confessed) dragged it inside the walls, the armed warriors whom it
contained issued forth in the night, and opened the gates to their
comrades.

The details of the sack of the city are neither more nor less horrible
than similar scenes which are unhappily too historical. Priam is slain
at the altar of his house; his family either share his fate, or are
carried into captivity. Of the contradictory legends as to the fate of
“Hector’s Andromache”--as in Virgil’s great poem she pathetically calls
herself--the reader will gladly choose, with that poet, the least
painful version, which leaves her settled at Buthrotus in Epirus, in a
peaceful retirement full of gentle regrets, as the wife of Hector’s
brother Helenus.

Of Helen and Menelaus we shall hear more in Homer’s tale of the
Wanderings of Ulysses. He says nothing of the scene which the later
dramatists give us, by no means inconsistent with his own portrait of
the pair, when at the taking of the city the outraged husband rushes
upon the adulteress with uplifted sword, and drops his weapon at the
sight of her well-remembered and matchless beauty. For the miserable
sequel of Agamemnon’s story we may refer also to the Odyssey. Few of the
Greek heroes returned home in peace. They had insulted the gods of Troy,
and they were cursed with toilsome wanderings and long banishment like
Ulysses, or met with a worse fate still. Diomed did not indeed leave his
wife Ægiale a heart-broken widow, as Dione in her anger had predicted,
but found on his return that she had consoled herself with another lover
in his absence, and narrowly escaped assassination by her hand. Teucer
was refused a home by his father, because he did not bring his brother
Ajax back with him to the old man. The lesser Ajax was wrecked and
drowned on his homeward voyage. Fate spared Nestor, old as he was, to
return to his stronghold at Pylos; but his son Antilochus had fallen in
the flower of his age on the plains of Troy. The names of many of the
wanderers were preserved in the colonies which they founded along the
coasts of Greece and Italy, and the heroes of the great Siege of Troy
spread its fame over all the then known world.