PENELOPE AND HER SUITORS.


The surviving heroes of the great expedition against Troy, after long
wanderings, have at length reached their homes, with one
exception--Ulysses has not been heard of in his island-kingdom of
Ithaca. Ten years have nearly passed since the fall of Troy, and still
his wife Penelope, and his aged father Laertes, and his young son
Telemachus, now growing up to manhood, keep weary watch for the hero’s
return. There is, moreover, a twofold trouble in the house. It is not
only anxiety for an absent husband, but the perplexity caused by a crowd
of importunate suitors for her hand, which vexes the soul of Penelope
from day to day. The young nobles of Ithaca and its dependent islands
have for many years flocked to the palace to seek the hand of her whom
they consider as virtually a widowed queen. It is to no purpose that
she professes her own firm belief that Ulysses still survives: she has
no kind of proof of his existence, and the suitors demand of her
that--in accordance with what would appear the custom of the
country--she shall make choice of some one among them to take the lost
hero’s place, and enjoy all the rights of sovereignty. How far the
lovers were attracted by the wealth and position of the lady, and how
far by the force of her personal charms, is a point somewhat hard to
decide. The Roman poet Horace imputes to them the less romantic motive.
They were, he says, of that class of prudent wooers--

    “Who prized good living more than ladies’ love;”

and he even hints that Penelope’s knowledge of their real sentiments
helped to account for her obduracy. But Horace, we must remember, was a
satirist by trade. A mere prosaic reader might be tempted to raise the
question whether the personal charms of Penelope, irresistible as they
might have been when Ulysses first left her for the war, must not have
been somewhat impaired during the twenty years of his absence; and
whether it was possible for a widow of that date (especially with a
grown-up son continually present as a memento) to inspire such very
ardent admiration. These arithmetical critics have always been the pests
of poetry. One very painstaking antiquarian--Jacob Bryant--in the course
of his studies on the Iliad, made the discovery, by a comparison of
mythological dates, that Helen herself must have been nearly a hundred
years old at the taking of Troy. But the question of age has been
unanimously voted impertinent by all her modern admirers: she still
shines in our fancy with

    “The starlike beauty of immortal eyes”

which the Laureate saw in his ‘Dream of Fair Women.’ The heroic legends
take no count of years. Woman is there beautiful by divine right of sex,
unless in those few special instances in which, for the purposes of the
story, particular persons are necessarily represented as old and
decrepit. Nor is there any ground for supposing that the suitors of
Penelope, like the courtiers of Queen Elizabeth, persisted in
attributing to her fictitious charms. She is evidently not less
beautiful in the poet’s eyes than in theirs. As beauty has been happily
said to be, after all, “the lover’s gift,” so also the bestowal of it
upon whom he will must be allowed to be the privilege of the poet. The
island-queen herself says, indeed, that her beauty had fled when Ulysses
left her, and could only be restored by his return; but this disclaimer
from the lips of a loving and mourning wife only makes her more
charming, and she is not the only woman, ancient or modern, who has
borrowed an additional fascination from her tears.

The suitors of Penelope, strange to say, are living at free quarters in
the palace of the absent Ulysses. Telemachus is too young, apparently,
to assert his rights as master of the house on his own or his mother’s
behalf. If the picture be true to the life--and there is no good reason
to suppose it otherwise--we must assume an age of rude licence even in
the midst of considerable civilisation, when, unless a king or chief
could hold his own by the strong hand, there was small chance of his
rights being respected. A partial explanation may also lie in the fact
that the wealth of the king was regarded as in some sort public
property, and that to keep open house for all whose rank entitled them
to sit at his table was probably a popular branch of the royal
prerogative. Telemachus is an only son, and he and his mother have
apparently no near kinsmen to avenge any wrong or insult that may be
offered. There is, besides, somewhat of weakness and tameness in his
character, more than befits the son of such a father. He is a
home-nurtured youth, of a gentle and kindly nature, a dutiful and
affectionate son; but his temperament is far too easy for the rude and
troublous times in which his lot is cast, and the roystering crew who
profess at least to be the wooers of Penelope have not been slow to find
it out. Some kindly critics (“Christopher North” among the number) have
refused to see any of these shortcomings in the young prince’s
character; but his father Ulysses saw them plainly. For thus it is he
speaks, at a later period of the tale, under his disguise of a
mendicant:--

   “Had I but youth as I have heart, or were
    The blameless brave Ulysses, or his son,
    Then let a stranger strike me headless there,
    If against any I leave revenge undone!”

But this is anticipating somewhat too much. We must return to the
opening of the poem.

The fate of Ulysses, so far as any knowledge of it has reached his wife
and son, lies yet in mystery. Only the gods know--and perhaps it were as
well for Penelope not to know--in what unworthy thraldom he is held. He
has incurred the anger of the great Sea-god, and therefore he is still
forbidden to reach his home. He has lain captive now for seven long
years in Ogygia, the enchanted realm of Calypso--

        “Girded of ocean in an island-keep,
    An island clothed with trees, the navel of the deep.

      “There dwells the child of Atlas, who can sound
      All seas, and eke doth hold the pillars tall
      Which keep the skies asunder from the ground.
      There him, still sorrowing, she doth aye enthral,
      Weaving serene enticements to forestal
      The memory of his island-realm.”

But the goddess of wisdom, who was his protecting genius throughout the
perils of the great siege, and by whose aid, as we have seen in the
Iliad, he has distanced so many formidable competitors in the race for
glory, has not forgotten her favourite. The opening scene of the Odyssey
shows us the gods in council on Olympus. Neptune alone is absent; he is
gone to feast, like Jupiter in the Iliad, with those mysterious people,
the far-off Æthiopians--

   “Extreme of men, who diverse ways retire,
    Some to the setting, some the rising sun.”

Minerva takes the opportunity of his absence to remind the Father of the
gods of the hard fate of Ulysses, so unworthy of a hero who has deserved
so well both of gods and men. It is agreed to send Mercury, the
messenger of the Immortals, to the island where Calypso holds Ulysses
captive in her toils, to announce to him that the day of his return
draws near. Minerva herself, meanwhile, will go to Ithaca, and put
strength into the heart of his son Telemachus, that he may rid his house
of this hateful brood of revellers, and set forth to make search for his
father. The passage in which the poet describes her visit is a fine one,
and it has been finely rendered by Mr Worsley:--

     “So ending, underneath her feet she bound
      Her faery sandals of ambrosial gold,
      Which o’er the waters and the solid ground
      Swifter than wind have borne her from of old;
      Then on the iron-pointed spear laid hold,
      Heavy and tall, wherewith she smites the brood
      Of heroes till her anger waxes cold;
      Then from Olympus swept in eager mood,
    And with the island-people in the court she stood

     “Fast by the threshold of the outer gate
      Of brave Odysseus: in her hand she bore
      The iron-pointed spear, heavy and great,
      And, waiting as a guest-friend at the door,
      Of Mentes, Taphian chief, the likeness wore;
      There found the suitors, who beguiled with play
      The hours, and sat the palace-gates before
      On hides of oxen which themselves did slay--
    Haughty of mien they sat, and girt with proud array.”

As the young prince sits thus, an unwilling host in his father’s hall,
meditating, says the poet, whether or no some day that father may return
suddenly and take vengeance on these invaders of his rights, against
whom he himself seems powerless, he lifts his eyes and sees a stranger
standing at the gate. With simple and high-bred courtesy--the courtesy
of the old Bible patriarchs, and even now practised by the Orientals,
though the march of modern civilisation has left little remnant of it in
our western isles--he hastes to bid the stranger welcome, on the simple
ground that he is a stranger, and will hear no word of his errand until
the rights of hospitality have been paid. Eager as he is to hear
possible news of his father, he restrains his anxiety to question his
guest. Not until the handmaidens have brought water in the silver ewers,
and the herald, and the carver, and the dame of the pantry (it is a
right royal establishment, if somewhat rude) have each done their office
to supply the stranger’s wants, does Telemachus ask him a single
question. But when the suitors have ended their feast, they call for
music and song. They compel Phemius, the household bard, to make mirth
for them. Then, while he plies his voice and lyre for their
entertainment, the son of Ulysses whispers aside with his visitor. Who
is he, and whence does he come? Is he a friend of his father’s? For many
a guest, and none unwelcome, had come to those halls, as the son well
knows, in _his_ day. Above all, does he bring news of _him_? Then the
disguised goddess tells her story, with a circumstantial minuteness of
invention which befits wisdom when she condescends to falsehood:--

                  “Know, my name is hight
      Mentes, the son of brave Anchialus,
      And sea-famed Taphos is my regal right;
      And with my comrades am I come to-night
      Hither, in sailing o’er the wine-dark sea
      To men far off, who stranger tongues indite.
      For copper am I bound to Temesè,
    And in my bark I bring sword-steel along with me.

     “Moored is my ship beyond the city walls,
      Under the wooded cape, within the bay.
      We twain do boast, each in the other’s halls,
      Our fathers’ friendship from an ancient day.
      Hero Laertes ask, and he will say.”

But of Ulysses’ present fate the guest declares he knows nothing; only
he has a presentiment that he is detained somewhere in an unwilling
captivity, but that, “though he be bound with chains of iron,” he will
surely find his way home again. But in any case, as his father’s friend,
the supposed Mentes bids Telemachus take heart and courage, and act
manfully for himself. Let him give this train of riotous suitors fair
warning to quit the palace, and waste his substance no more; let his
mother Penelope go back to her own father’s house (if she desires to wed
again), and make her choice and hold her wedding-banquet there; and for
his own part, let him at once set sail and make inquiry for his father
round the coasts of Greece. It may be that Nestor of Pylos, or Menelaus
of Sparta--the last returned of the chiefs of the expedition--can give
him some tidings. If he can only hear that Ulysses is yet alive, then he
may well endure to wait his return with patience; if assured of his
death, it will befit him to take due vengeance on these his enemies. The
divine visitor even hints a reproach of Telemachus’ present
inactivity:--

   “No more, with thews like these, to weakness cling.
    Hast thou not heard divine Orestes’ fame,
    Who slew the secret slayer of the king
    His father, and achieved a noble name?
    Thou also, friend, to thine own strength lay claim--
    Comely thou art and tall--that men may speak
    Thy prowess, and their children speak the same.”

The young prince duteously accepts the counsel, as from his father’s
friend, and prays his guest to tarry a while. But Minerva, her mission
accomplished, suddenly changes her shape, spreads wings, and vanishes.
Then Telemachus recognises the goddess, and feels a new life and
spirit born within him. If we choose to admit an allegorical
interpretation--more than commonly tempting, as must be confessed, in
this particular case--it is the advent of Wisdom and Discretion to the
conscious heart of the youth, hitherto too little awakened to its
responsibilities.

Telemachus returns to his place among the revellers a new man. They are
still listening to the minstrel, Phemius, who chants a lay of the return
of the Greek chiefs from Troy, and the sufferings inflicted on them
during their homeward voyage by the vengeance of the gods. The sound
reaches Penelope where she sits apart with her wise maidens, like the
mother of Sisera, in her “upper chamber”--the “bower” of the ladies of
mediæval chivalry. She comes down the stair, and stands on the threshold
of the banqueting-hall, attracted by the song. But the subject is too
painful. She calls the bard to her, and begs him, for her sake, to
choose some other theme. We must not be too angry with Telemachus
because, in the first flush of his newly-awakened sense of the
responsibilities of his position, he uses language, in addressing his
mother, which to our ears has a sound of harshness and reproach. He bids
her not presume to set limits to the inspiration of the bard--the
noblest theme is ever the best. He reminds her that woman’s kingdom is
the loom and the distaff, and that the rule over men in his father’s
house now belongs to him. Viewed with reference to the tone of the age
as regarded the duties of women,--compared with the parting charge of
Hector in the Iliad to the wife he loved so tenderly, and even with a
higher example in Scripture,--there is nothing startling or repulsive in
such language from a son to his mother. To the young prince in his new
mood, while the counsels of Minerva were yet ringing in his ears, the
absence and the sufferings of his father might well seem the only theme
on which he could endure to hear the minstrel descant; it was of this,
he feels, that he needed to be continually reminded. And if hitherto he
has allowed this riotous company to assume that, in the absence of
Ulysses, the government of his house has rested in the weak hands of a
woman, it shall be so no longer. He will take his father’s place.

The mother sees the change in her son’s temper with some surprise--we
may suppose, with somewhat mingled feelings of approval and
mortification. The boy has grown into a man on the sudden. The poet
gives us but a single word as any clue to the effect upon Penelope of
this evidently unaccustomed outburst of self-assertion on the part of
Telemachus. “Astonished,” he says, she withdraws at once to her upper
chamber, and there weeps her sorrows to sleep. Telemachus himself
addresses the assembled company in a tone which is evidently as new to
their ears as to those of his mother. He bids them, with a haughty
courtesy, feast their fill to-night; to-morrow he will summon (as is the
custom of the Homeric princes) a council of the heads of the people, and
there he will give them all public warning to quit his father’s house,
and feast--if they needs must feast--in each other’s houses, at their
own cost. If they refuse, and still make this riot of an absent man’s
wealth, he appeals from men to “the gods who live for ever” for a sure
and speedy vengeance.

The careless revellers mark the change in the young man as instantly as
Penelope. For a few moments they bite their lips in silence--“wondering
that he spake so bold.” The first to answer him is Antinous, the most
prominent ringleader of the confraternity of suitors. His character is
very like that of the worst stamp of the “Cavalier” of the days of our
own Charles II. Brave, bold, and insolent, there is yet a reckless
gaiety and a ready wit about him which would have made him at once a
favourite in that unprincipled court. He adds to these characteristics a
quality of which he might, unhappily, have also found a high example
there--that of ingratitude. He is bound by strong ties of obligation to
the house of Ulysses; his father had come in former days to seek an
asylum with the Chief of Ithaca from the vengeance of the Thesprotians,
and had been kindly entertained by him until his death. The son now
answers Telemachus with a taunting compliment upon the new character in
which he has just come out. “He means to claim for himself the
sovereignty of the island, as his father’s heir, no doubt; but the gods
forbid that Ithaca should ever come under the rule of so fierce a
despot!” Telemachus makes answer that he will at all events rule his
father’s house. Upon this, Eurynomus, another leading spirit among the
rivals--a smoother-tongued and more cautious individual--soothes the
angry youth with what seems a plausible recognition of his rights, in
order that he may get an answer to a question on which he feels an
interest not unmixed, as we may easily understand, with some secret
apprehension. “Who was this traveller from over sea? and--did he happen
to bring any news of Ulysses?” But Telemachus has learnt subtlety as
well as wisdom from the disguised goddess. He gives the name assumed by
his visitor, Mentes, an old friend of the house. But as to his father’s
return, the oracles of the gods and the reports of men all agree in
pronouncing it to have now become hopeless. So the revel is renewed till
nightfall; and while the feasters go off to their own quarters somewhere
near at hand, Telemachus retires to his chamber (separate, apparently,
from the main building), where his old nurse Eurycleia tends him with a
careful affection, as though he were still a child, folding and hanging
up the vest of fine linen which he takes off when he lies down to sleep,
and drawing the bolt of the chamber door through its silver ring when
she leaves him.

The council of notables is summoned for the morrow. No such meeting has
been held since the departure of Ulysses for Troy. As Telemachus passes
to take his place there, all men remark a new majesty in his looks.

      “So when the concourse to the full was grown,
      He lifted in his hand the steely spear,
      And to the council moved, but not alone,
      For as he walked his swift dogs followed near.
      Also Minerva did with grace endear
      His form, that all the people gazed intent
      And wondered, while he passed without a peer.
      Straight to his father’s seat his course he bent,
    And the old men gave way in reverence as he went.”

He makes his passionate protest before them all against the insufferable
waste of his household by this crew of revellers, and against their own
supineness in offering him no aid to dislodge them. Antinous rises to
answer him, beginning, as before, with an ironical compliment--“the
young orator’s language is as sublime as his spirit.” But the fault, he
begs to assure him, lies not with the suitors, but with the queen
herself. She has been playing fast and loose with her lovers, deluding
them, for these three years past, with vain hopes and false promises.
She had, indeed, been practising a kind of pious fraud upon them. She
had set up a mighty loom, in which she wrought diligently to complete,
as she professed, a winding-sheet of delicate texture for her husband’s
father, the aged Laertes, against the day of his death. Not until this
sad task was finished, she entreated of them, let her be asked to choose
a new bridegroom. To so much forbearance they had all assented; but lo!
they had lately discovered that what she wrought by day she carefully
unwound by night, so that the task promised to be an endless one. Some
of the handmaidens (who had found their own lovers, too, amongst their
royal mistress’s many suitors) had betrayed her secret. Antinous is
gallant enough to add to this recital of Penelope’s craft warm praises
of the queen herself, even giving her full credit for the bright woman’s
wit which had so long baffled them all.

                            “Matchless skill
    To weave the splendid web; sagacious thought,
    And shrewdness such as never fame ascribed
    To any beauteous Greek of ancient days,
    Tyro, Mycene, or Alcmene, loved
    Of Jove himself, all whom th’ accomplished queen
    Transcends in knowledge--ignorant alone
    That, wooed long time, she should at last be won.”--(Cowper.)

But they will now be put off no longer--she must make her choice, or
they will never leave the house so long as she remains there unespoused.
Telemachus indignantly refuses to send his mother home to her father;
and repeats his passionate appeal to the gods for vengeance against the
wrongs which he is himself helpless to deal with. At once an omen from
heaven seems to betoken that the appeal is heard and accepted. Two
eagles are seen flying over the heads of the crowd assembled in the
marketplace, where they suddenly wheel round, and tear each other
furiously with beak and talons. The soothsayer is at hand to interpret;
the aged Halitherses, who reminds them all how he had foretold, when
Ulysses first left his own shores for Troy, the twenty years that would
elapse before his return. Now, he sees by this portent, the happy day
is near at hand; nay, in his zeal for his master’s house he goes so far
as to urge the assembled people to take upon themselves at once the
punishment of these traitors. One of the suitors mocks at the old man’s
auguries, and threatens him for his interference. The prophet is
silenced; and Telemachus, finding no support from the assembly, asks but
for a ship and crew to be furnished him, that he may set forth in search
of his father. One indignant voice, among the apathetic crowd, is raised
in the young prince’s defence: it is that of Mentor, to whom Ulysses had
intrusted the guardianship of his rights in his absence. His name has
passed into a synonym for all prudent guardians and moral counsellors,
chiefly in consequence of Fénélon’s didactic tale of ‘Télémaque,’
already mentioned, in which the adventures of the son of Ulysses were
“improved,” with elaborate morals, for the benefit of youth; and in
which Mentor, as the young prince’s travelling tutor, played a
conspicuous part. He vents his indignation here in a very striking
protest against popular ingratitude:--

   “Hear me, ye Ithacans;--be never king
    From this time forth benevolent, humane,
    Or righteous; but let every sceptred hand
    Rule merciless, and deal in wrong alone;
    Since none of all his people, whom he swayed
    With such paternal gentleness and love,
    Remembers the divine Ulysses more.”--(Cowper.)

He, too, meets with jeers and mockery from the insolent nobles, and
Telemachus quits the assembly to wander in melancholy mood along the
sea-shore--the usual resort, it will be remarked, of the Homeric
heroes, when they seek to calm the tumult of grief or anger. Such appeal
to the soothing influence of what Homer calls the “illimitable” ocean is
not less true to nature than it is characteristic of the poetical and
imaginative temperament. Bathing his hands in the sea waves--for prayer,
to the Greek as to the Hebrew mind, demanded a preparatory
purification--Telemachus lifts his cry to his guardian goddess, Minerva.
At once she stands before him there in the likeness of Mentor. She
speaks to him words of encouragement and counsel. Evil men may mock at
him now; but if he be determined to prove himself the true son of such a
father, he shall not lack honour in the end. She will provide him ship
and crew for his voyage. Thus encouraged by the divine Wisdom which
speaks in the person of Mentor, he returns to the banquet-hall, to avoid
suspicion. Yet, when Antinous greets him there with a mocking show of
friendship, he wrenches his hand roughly from his grasp, and quits the
company. Taking into his counsels his nurse Eurycleia--who is the palace
housekeeper also--he bids her make ready good store of provisions for
his voyage: twelve capacious vessels filled with the ripest wine, twenty
measures of fine meal, and grain besides, carefully sewn up in wallets.
In the dusk of this very evening, unknown to his mother, he will embark;
for the goddess (still in Mentor’s likeness) has chartered for him a
galley with twenty stout rowers, which is to lie ready launched for him
in the harbour at nightfall. Eurycleia vainly remonstrates with her
nursling on his dangerous purpose--

      “‘Ah! bide with thine own people here at ease.
      There is no call to suffer useless pain,
      Wandering always on the barren seas.’
      But he: ‘Good nurse, prithee take heart again,
      These things are not without a god nor vain.
      Swear only that my mother shall not know
      Till twelve days pass, or she herself be fain
      To ask thee, or some other the tidings show,
    Lest her salt tears despoil much loveliness with woe.’”

Telemachus’s resolve is fixed. As soon as the shadows of evening fall,
Minerva sends a strange drowsiness on the assembled revellers in the
hall of Ulysses, so that the wine-cups drop from their hands, and they
stagger off early to their couches. Then, in the person of Mentor, she
summons Telemachus to where the galley lies waiting for him, guides him
on board, and takes her place beside him in the stern.

                                    “Loud and clear
      Sang the bluff Zephyr o’er the wine-dark mere
      Behind them. By Athene’s hest he blew.
      Telemachus his comrades on did cheer
      To set the tackling. With good hearts the crew
    Heard him, and all things ranged in goodly order true.

      “The olive mast, planted with care, they bind
      With ropes, the white sails stretch on twisted hide,
      And brace the mainsail to the bellying wind.
      Loudly the keel rushed through the seething tide.
      Soon as the good ship’s gear was all applied,
      They ranged forth bowls crowned with dark wine, and poured
      To gods who everlastingly abide,
      Most to the stern-eyed child of heaven’s great lord.
    All night the ship clave onward till the Dawn upsoared.”






TELEMACHUS GOES IN QUEST OF HIS FATHER.


Hitherto, and throughout the first four books of the poem, Telemachus,
and not Ulysses, is the hero of the tale. The voyagers soon reach the
rocky shores of Pylos,[29] the stronghold of the old “horse-tamer,”
Nestor. He has survived the long campaign in which so many of his
younger comrades fell, and is now sitting, surrounded by his sons, at a
great public banquet held in honour of the Sea-god. Telemachus, with a
natural modesty not unbecoming his youth, is at first reluctant to
accost and question a chieftain so full of years and renown, and his
attendant guardian has to reassure him by the promise that “heaven will
put words into his mouth.” There is no need of question yet, however,
either on the side of hosts or guests. Pisistratus, the youngest son of
Nestor, upon whom the duties of “guest-master” naturally fall, welcomes
the travellers with the invariable courtesy accorded by the laws of
Homeric society to all strangers as their right, bids them take a seat
at the banquet, and proffers the wine-cup--to the supposed Mentor
first, as the elder. He only requests of them, before they drink, to
join their hosts in their public supplication to Neptune; for he will
not do them the injustice to suppose prayer can be unknown or
distasteful to them, be they who they may--“All men have need of
prayer.” When the prayer has been duly made by both for a blessing on
their hosts and for their own safe return, and when they have eaten and
drunk to their hearts’ content, then, and not till then, Nestor inquires
their errand. The form in which the old chief put his question is as
strongly characteristic of a primitive civilisation as the open
hospitality which has preceded it. He asks the voyagers, in so many
words, whether they are pirates?--not for a moment implying that such an
occupation would be to their discredit. The freebooters of the sea in
the Homeric times were dangerous enough, but not disreputable. It was an
iron age, when every man’s hand was more or less against his neighbour,
and the guest of to-day might be an enemy to-morrow. Nestor’s downright
question may help a modern reader to understand the waste of Ulysses’
substance in his absence by the lawless spirits of Ithaca. It was only
so long as “the strong man armed kept his palace” in person that his
goods were in peace. Telemachus, in reply, declares his name and errand,
and implores the old chieftain, in remembrance of the days when he and
Ulysses fought side by side at Troy, to give him, if he can, some
tidings of his father.

     “Answered him Nestor, the Gerenian knight:
      ‘Friend, thou remind’st me of exceeding pain,
      Which we, the Achaians of unconquered might,
      There, and in ships along the clouded main,
      Led by Achilleus to the spoil, did drain,
      With those our fightings round the fortress high
      Of Priam king. There all our best were slain--
      There the brave Aias and Achilleus lie;
    Patroclus there, whose wisdom matched the gods on high.

     “‘There too Antilochus my son doth sleep,
      Who in his strength was all so void of blame--
      Swift runner, and staunch warrior.’”

Nestor shows the same love of story-telling which marks his character in
the Iliad. Modern critics who are inclined to accuse the old chief of
garrulity should remember that, in an age in which there were no daily
newspapers with their “special correspondents,” a good memory and a
fluent tongue were very desirable qualifications of old age. The old
campaigner in his retirement was the historian of his own times. Unless
he told his story often and at length amongst the men of a younger
generation when they met at the banquet, all memory of the gallant deeds
of old would be lost, and even the professional bard would have lacked
the data on which to build his lay. Many a Nestor must have been
ready--in season and out of season--to

    “Shoulder his crutch, and show how fields were won,”

before any Homer could have sung of the Trojan war. Even now, we are
ready to listen readily to the veteran’s reminiscences of a past
generation, whether in war or peace, who has a retentive memory and a
pleasant style--only he now commonly tells his story in print.

Nestor proceeds to tell his guests how the gods, after Troy was taken,
had stirred up strife between the brother-kings Agamemnon and Menelaus;
and how, in consequence, the fleet had divided, Menelaus with one
division sailing straight for home, while the rest had waited with
Agamemnon in the hope of appeasing the wrath of heaven. Ulysses, who had
at first set sail with Menelaus, had turned back and rejoined his
leader. Of his subsequent fate Nestor knows nothing; but he bids the
young man take courage. He has heard of the troubles that beset him at
home; but if Minerva vouchsafes to the son the love and favour which (as
was known to all the Greeks) she bore to his father, all will go well
with him yet. Neither Nestor nor Telemachus are aware (though the reader
is) that the Wisdom which had made Ulysses a great name was even now
guiding the steps of his son. One thing yet the youth longs to hear from
the lips of his father’s ancient friend--the terrible story of
Agamemnon’s death by the hands of his wife and her paramour, and the
vengeance taken by his son Orestes. It is a tale which he has heard as
yet but darkly, but has dwelt upon in his heart ever since the goddess,
at her visit under the shape of Mentes, made such significant reference
to the story. Nestor tells it now at length--the bloody legend which,
variously shaped, became the theme of the poet and the dramatist from
generation to generation of Greek literature. In Homer’s version we miss
some of the horrors which later writers wove into the tale; and it is
not unlikely that, in the simpler form in which it is here given, we
have the main facts of an actual domestic tragedy. During Agamemnon’s
long absence in the Trojan war, his queen Clytemnestra, sister of
Helen, had been seduced from her marriage faith by her husband’s cousin
Ægisthus. In vain had the household bard, faithful to the trust
committed to him by his lord in his absence, counselled and warned his
lady against the peril; and Ægisthus at last, hopeless of his object so
long as she had these honest eyes upon her, had caused him to be carried
to a desert island to perish with hunger. So she fell, and Ægisthus
ruled palace and kingdom. At last Agamemnon returned from the weary
siege, and, landing on the shore of his kingdom, knelt down and kissed
the soil in a transport of joyful tears. It is probably with no
conscious imitation, but merely from the correspondence of the poet’s
mind, that Shakespeare attributes the very same expression of feeling to
his Richard II.:--

                        “I weep for joy
    To stand upon my kingdom once again.
    Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
    Though rebels wound thee with their horses’ hoofs:
    As a long-parted mother with her child
    Plays fondly with her tears, and smiles in meeting,
    So weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
    And do thee favour with my royal hands.”

Agamemnon meets with as tragical a reception from the usurper of his
rights as did Richard Plantagenet:--

     “Many the warm tears from his eyelids shed,
      When through the mist of his long-hoped delight
      He saw the lovely land before him spread.
      Him from high watch-tower marked the watchman wight
      Set by Ægisthus to watch day and night,
      Two talents of pure gold his promised hire.
      Twelve months he watched, lest the Avenger light
      Unheeded, and remember his old fire;
    Then to his lord made haste to show the tidings dire.

     “Forthwith Ægisthus, shaping a dark snare,
      Score of his bravest chose, and ambush set,
      And bade rich banquets close at hand prepare.
      Then he with horses and with chariots met
      The king, and welcomed him with fair words, yet
      With fraud at heart, and to the feast him led;
      There, like a stalled ox, smote him while he fed.”

For seven years the adulterer and usurper reigned in security at Mycenæ.
But meanwhile the boy Orestes, stolen away from the guilty court by his
elder sister, was growing up to manhood, the destined avenger of blood,
at Athens. In the seventh year he came back in disguise to his father’s
house, slew Ægisthus, and recovered his inheritance. There was a darker
shadow still thrown over Agamemnon’s death by later poets, which finds
no place in Homer. The tragic interest in the dramas of Æschylus and
Sophocles, which are founded on this story, lies in their representing
Clytemnestra herself as the murderess of her husband, and Orestes, as
his father’s avenger, not hesitating to become the executioner of his
mother as well as of her paramour.

Nestor has finished his story, and the travellers offer to return to
their vessel and continue their quest; but the old chieftain will not
hear of it. That night, at least, they must remain as his guests--on the
morrow he will send them on to the court of Menelaus at Sparta, where
they may chance to learn the latest tidings of Ulysses. Telemachus’s
guardian bids him accept the invitation, then suddenly spreads wings,
and takes to flight in the likeness of a sea-eagle; and both Nestor and
Telemachus recognise at last that, in the shape of Mentor, the goddess
of wisdom has been so long his guide. A sacrifice is forthwith offered
in her honour--a heifer, with horns overlaid with gold; a public banquet
is held as before, and then, according to promise, Telemachus is sped on
his journey. A pair of swift and strong-limbed horses--the old chief
knew what a good horse was, and charged his sons specially to take the
best in his stalls--are harnessed for the journey, and good provision of
corn and wine, “such as was fit for princes,” stored in the chariot.
Pisistratus himself mounts beside his new friend as driver. Their first
day’s stage is Pheræ, where they are hospitably entertained by Nestor’s
friend, Diocles; and, after driving all the following day, they reach
the palace gates of Menelaus, in Sparta, when the sun has set upon the
yellow harvest fields, “and all the ways are dim.”

At Sparta, too, as at Pylos, the city is holding high festival on the
evening of their arrival. A double marriage is being celebrated in the
halls of Menelaus. Hermione, his sole child by Helen, is leaving her
parents to become the bride of Neoptolemus (otherwise known as Pyrrhus,
the “red-haired”), son of the great Achilles; and at the same time the
young Megapenthes, Menelaus’s son by a slave wife, is to be married in
his father’s house. There is music and dancing in the halls when the
travellers arrive; but Menelaus, like Nestor, will ask no questions of
the strangers until the bath, and food, and wine in plenty, have
refreshed them, and their horses have good barley-meal and rye set
before them in the mangers. The magnificence of Menelaus’s palace, as
described by the poet, is a very remarkable feature in the tale. It
reads far more like a scene from the ‘Arabian Nights’ than a lay of
early Greece. The lofty roofs fling back a flashing light as the
travellers enter, “like as the splendour of the sun or moon.” Gold,
silver, bronze, ivory, and electrum, combine their brilliancy in the
decorations. The guests wash in lavers of silver, and the water is
poured from golden ewers. Telemachus is struck with wonder at the sight,
and can compare it to nothing earthly.

   “Such and so glorious to celestial eyne
    Haply may gleam the Olympian halls divine!”

The palaces of Sparta, as seen in Homer’s vision, contrast remarkably
with the estimate formed of them by the Greek historian of a later age.
Thucydides speaks of the city as having no public buildings of any
magnificence, such as would impress a stranger with an idea of its real
power, but wearing rather the appearance of a collection of villages. It
is difficult to conceive that the actual Sparta of a much earlier age
could have contained anything at all corresponding to this Homeric ideal
of splendour; and the question arises, whether we have here an
indistinct record of an earlier and extinct civilisation, or whether the
poet drew an imaginary description from his own recollections of the
gorgeous barbaric splendour of some city in the further East, which he
had visited in his travels. If this be nothing more than a poet’s
exaggerated and idealised view of an actual state of higher
civilisation, which once really existed in the old Greek kingdoms, and
disappeared under the Dorian Heraclids, it is a singular record of a
backward step in a nation’s history; and the Homeric poems become
especially valuable as preserving the memorials of a state of society
which would otherwise have passed altogether into oblivion. There is
less difficulty in believing the possible existence of an
ante-historical civilisation which afterwards became extinct, if we
remember the splendours of Solomon’s court, as to which the widespread
traditions of the East only corroborate the records of Scripture, and
all which passed away almost entirely with its founder. It is remarkable
that in the ancient Welsh poem, ‘Y Gododin,’ by Aneurin Owen, of which
the supposed date is A.D. 570, there are very similar properties and
scenery: knights in “armour of gold” and “purple plumes,” mounted on
“thick-maned chargers,” with “golden spurs,” who must--if ever they rode
the Cambrian mountains--have been a very different race from the wild
Welsh who held Edward Longshanks at bay. Are we to look upon this as
merely the common language of all poets? and, if so, how comes it to be
common to all? Were the Welsh who fought in the half-mythical battle of
Cattraeth as far superior, in the scale of civilisation, to their
successors who fell at Conway, as the Spartans under Menelaus (if
Homer’s picture of them is to be trusted) were to the Spartans under
Leonidas? or was there some remote original, Oriental or other, whence
this ornate military imagery passed into the poetry of such very
different nations?

So, too, when Helen--now restored to her place in Menelaus’s
household--comes forth to greet the strangers, her whole surroundings
are rather those of an Eastern sultana than of any princess of Spartan
race.

   “Forth from her fragrant chamber Helen passed
    Like gold-bowed Dian: and Adraste came
    The bearer of her throne’s majestic frame;
    Her carpet’s fine-wrought fleece Alcippe bore,
    Phylo her basket bright with silver ore,
    Gift of the wife of Polybus, who swayed
    When Thebes, the Egyptian Thebes, scant wealth displayed.
    His wife Alcandra, from her treasured store,
    A golden spindle to fair Helen bore,
    And a bright silver basket, on whose round
    A rim of burnished gold was closely bound.”--(Sotheby.)

These elaborate preparations for her “work”--which is some delicate
fabric of wool tinged with the costly purple dye--have little in common
with the household loom of Penelope. Here, as in the Iliad, refinement
and elegance of taste are the distinctive characteristics of Helen; and
they help to explain, though they in no way excuse, the fascination
exercised over her by Paris, the accomplished musician and brilliant
converser, rich in all the graces which Venus, for her own evil
purposes, had bestowed on her favourite. Helen is still, as in the
Iliad, emphatically “the lady;” the lady of rank and fashion, as things
were in that day, with all the fashionable faults, and all the
fashionable good qualities: selfish, and luxurious, gracious and
fascinating. Her transgressions, and the seemingly lenient view which
the poet takes of them, have been discussed sufficiently in the Iliad.
They are all now condoned. She has recovered from her miserable
infatuation; and if we are inclined to despise Menelaus for his easy
temper as a husband, we must remember the mediæval legends of Arthur and
Guinevere, to whom Helen bears, in many points of character, a strong
resemblance. The readiness which Arthur shows to have accepted at any
time the repentance of his queen is almost repulsive to modern feeling,
but was evidently not so to the taste of the age in which those legends
were popular; nor is it at all clear that such forgiveness is less
consonant with the purest code of morality than the stern implacability
towards such offences which the laws of modern society would enjoin.
Menelaus has forgiven Helen, even as Arthur--though not Mr Tennyson’s
Arthur--would have forgiven Guinevere. But she has not forgiven herself,
and this is a strong redeeming point in her character; “shameless” is
still the uncompromising epithet which she applies to herself, as in the
Iliad, even in the presence of her husband and his guests.

They, too, have been wanderers since the fall of Troy, like the lost
Ulysses. The king tells his own story before he interrogates his
guest:--

      “Hardly I came at last, in the eighth year,
      Home with my ships from my long wanderings.
      Far as to Cyprus in my woe severe,
      Phœnice, Egypt, did the waves me bear.
      Sidon and Ethiopia I have seen,
      Even to Erembus roamed, and Libya, where
      The lambs are full-horned from their birth, I ween,
    And in the rolling year the fruitful flocks thrice yean.”

He has grown rich in his travels, and would be happy, but for the
thought of his brother Agamemnon’s miserable end. Another grief, too,
lies very close to his heart--the uncertainty which still shrouds the
fate of his good comrade Ulysses.

      “His was the fate to suffer grievous woe,
      And mine to mourn without forgetfulness,
      While onward and still on the seasons flow,
      And he yet absent, and I comfortless.
      Whether he live or die we cannot guess.
      Him haply old Laertes doth lament,
      And sage Penelope, in sore distress,
      And to Telemachus the hours are spent
    In sadness, whom he left new-born when first he went.”

The son is touched at the reminiscence, and drops a quiet tear, while
for a moment he covers his eyes with his robe. It is at this juncture
that Helen enters the hall. Her quick thought seizes the truth at once;
as she had detected the father through his disguise of rags when he came
as a spy into Troy, so now she recognises the son at once by his strong
personal resemblance. Then Menelaus, too, sees the likeness, and
connects it with the youth’s late emotion. Young Pisistratus at once
tells him who his friend is, and on what errand they are travelling
together. Warm is the greeting which the King of Sparta bestows on the
son of his old friend. There shall be no more lamentation for this
night; all painful subjects shall be at least postponed until the
morrow. But still, as the feast goes on, the talk is of Ulysses. Helen
has learnt, too, in her wanderings, some of the secrets of Egyptian
pharmacy. She has mixed in the wine a potent Eastern drug, which raises
the soul above all care and sorrow--

      “Which so cures heartache and the inward stings,
      That men forget all sorrow wherein they pine.
      He who hath tasted of the draught divine
      Weeps not that day, although his mother die
      Or father, or cut off before his eyen
      Brother or child beloved fall miserably,
    Hewn by the pitiless sword, he sitting silent by.”

The “Nepenthes” of Helen has obtained a wide poetical celebrity. Some
allegorical interpreters of the poem would have us understand that it is
the charms of conversation which have this miraculous power to make men
forget their grief. Without at all questioning their efficacy, it may be
safely assumed that the poet had in his mind something more material.
The drug has been supposed to be opium; but the effects ascribed to the
Arabian “haschich”--a preparation of hemp--correspond very closely with
those said to be produced by Helen’s potion. Sir Henry Halford thought
it might more probably be the “hyoscyamus,” which he says is still used
at Constantinople and in the Morea under the name of “_Nebensch_.”[30]

Not till the next morning does Telemachus discuss with Menelaus the
object of his journey. What little the Spartan king can tell him of the
fate of his father is so far reassuring, that there is good hope he is
yet alive. But he is--or was--detained in an enchanted island. There the
goddess Calypso holds him an unwilling captive, and forces her love upon
him. He longs sore for his home in Ithaca; but the spells of the
enchantress are too strong. So much has Menelaus learnt, during his own
wanderings, while wind-bound at Pharos in Egypt, from Proteus, “the old
man of the sea”--

    “Who knows all secret things in ocean pent.”

The knowledge had to be forced from him by stratagem. Proteus was in the
habit of coming up out of the sea at mid-day to sleep under the shadow
of the rocks, with his flock of seals about him. Instructed by his
daughter Eidothea--who had taken pity on the wanderers--Menelaus and
some of his comrades had disguised themselves in seal-skins[31] (though
much disturbed, as he confesses, by the “very ancient and fish-like
smell”), and had seized the ancient sea-god as he lay asleep on the
shore. Proteus, like the genie in the Arabian tale, changed himself
rapidly into all manner of terrible forms; but Menelaus held him fast
until he was obliged to resume his own, when, confessing himself
vanquished by the mortal, the god proceeded in recompense to answer his
questions as to his own fate, and that of his companion chiefs, the
wanderers on their way home from Troy. The transformations of Proteus
have much exercised the ingenuity of the allegorists. The pliancy of
such principles of interpretation becomes amusingly evident, when one
authority explains to us that here are symbolised the wiles of
sophistry--another, that it is the inscrutability of truth, ever
escaping from the seeker’s grasp; while others, again, see in Proteus
the versatility of nature, the various ideals of philosophers, or the
changes of the atmosphere. From such source had the king learnt the
terrible end of his brother Agamemnon, and the ignoble captivity of
Ulysses; but for himself, the favourite of heaven, a special exemption
has been decreed from the common lot of mortality. It is thus that
Proteus reads the fates for the husband of Helen:--

   “Thee to Elysian fields, earth’s farthest end,
    Where Rhadamanthus dwells, the gods shall send;
    Where mortals easiest pass the careless hour;
    No lingering winters there, nor snow, nor shower,
    But ocean ever, to refresh mankind,
    Breathes the shrill spirit of the western wind.”

The grand lines of Homer are thus grandly rendered by Abraham Moore.
Homer repeats the description of the Elysian fields, the abode of the
blest, in a subsequent passage of the poem, which has been translated
almost word for word--yet as only a poet could translate it--by the
Roman Lucretius. Mr Tennyson has the same great original before him when
he makes his King Arthur see, in his dying thought,

        “The island-valley of Avilion,
    Where falls not hail nor rain nor any snow,
    Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
    Deep-meadowed, happy, fair with orchard lawns,
    And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea.”

The calm sweet music of these lines has charmed many a reader who never
knew that the strain had held all Greece enchanted two thousand years
ago. It has been scarcely possible to add anything to the quiet beauty
of the original Greek, but the English poet has at least shown exquisite
skill in the setting of the jewel. But Homer has always been held as
common property by later poets. Milton’s classical taste had previously
adopted some of the imagery; the “Spirit” in the ‘Masque of Comus’
speaks of the happy climes which are his proper abode:--

   “There eternal summer dwells,
    And west winds, with musky wing,
    About the cedarn alleys fling
    Nard and cassia’s balmy smells.”

Gladly would Menelaus have kept the son of his old comrade with him
longer as a guest, but Telemachus is impatient to rejoin his galley,
which waits for him at Pylos. His host reluctantly dismisses him, not
without parting gifts; but the gift which the king would have had him
take--a chariot and yoke of three swift horses--the island-prince will
not accept. Ithaca has no room for horse-coursing, and he loves his
rocky home all the better.

   “With me no steeds to Ithaca shall sail.
    Such leave I here--thy grace, thy rightful vaunt,
    Lord of a level land, where never fail
    Lotus, and rye, and wheat, and galingale:
    No room hath Ithaca to course, no mead--
    Goat-haunted, dearer than horse-feeding vale.”

There is much consternation in the palace of Ulysses when the absence of
Telemachus is at last discovered. Antinous and his fellow-revellers are
struck with astonishment at the bold step he has suddenly taken, and
with alarm at the possible result. Antinous will man a vessel at once,
and waylay him in the straits on his return. The revelation of this plot
to Penelope by Medon, the herald, one of the few faithful retainers of
Ulysses’ house, makes her for the first time aware of her son’s
departure; for old Eurycleia has kept her darling’s secret safe even
from his mother. In an agony of grief she sits down amidst her
sympathising maidens, and bewails herself as “twice bereaved,” of son
and husband. She lifts her prayer to Minerva, and the goddess hears.
When Penelope has wept herself to sleep, there stands at the head of her
couch what seems the form of her sister Iphthimè, and assures her of her
son’s safety: he has a guardian about his path “such as many a hero
would pray to have.” Even in her dream, Penelope is half conscious of
the dignity of her visitor; and, true wife that she is, she prays the
vision to tell her something of her absent husband. But such revelation,
the figure tells her, is no part of its mission, and so vanishes into
thin air. The sleeper awakes--it is a dream indeed; but it has left a
lightness and elasticity of spirit which the queen accepts as an augury
of good to come.






ULYSSES WITH CALYPSO AND THE PHÆACIANS.


The fifth book of the poem opens with a second council of the gods. It
has been remarked with some truth that the gods of the Odyssey are, on
the whole, more dignified than those of the Iliad. They are divided in
this poem, as well as in the other, in their loves and hates towards
mortals, but their dissensions are neither so passionate nor so
grotesque. Minerva complains bitterly to the Ruler of Olympus of the
injustice with which her favourite Ulysses is treated, by being kept so
long an exile from his home. She, too, repeats the indignant protest
which the poet had before put into the mouth of Mentor, which has found
vent in all times and ages, from Job and the Psalmist downwards, when in
the bitterness of a wounded spirit men rebel against what seems the
inequality of the justice of heaven; that “there is one event to the
righteous and the wicked;” nay, that the wicked have even the best of
it. “Let never king henceforth do justly and love mercy; but let him
rule with iron hand and work all iniquity; for lo! what is Ulysses’
reward?” Jupiter is moved by the appeal. He at once despatches Mercury
to the island of Calypso, to announce to her that Ulysses must be
released from her toils; such is his sovereign will, and it must be
obeyed. The description of the island-grotto in which Calypso dwells is
one of the most beautiful in Homer, and it is a passage upon which our
English translators have delighted to employ their very best powers.
Perhaps Leigh Hunt’s version is the most simply beautiful, and as
faithful as any. Mercury has sped on his errand;--

   “And now arriving at the isle, he springs
    Oblique, and landing with subsided wings,
    Walks to the cavern ’mid the tall green rocks,
    Where dwelt the goddess with the lovely locks.
    He paused; and there came on him, as he stood,
    A smell of cedar and of citron wood,
    That threw a perfume all about the isle;
    And she within sat spinning all the while,
    And sang a low sweet song that made him hark and smile.
    A sylvan nook it was, grown round with trees,
    Poplars, and elms, and odorous cypresses,
    In which all birds of ample wing, the owl
    And hawk, had nests, and broad-tongued waterfowl.
    The cave in front was spread with a green vine,
    Whose dark round bunches almost burst with wine;
    And from four springs, running a sprightly race,
    Four fountains clear and crisp refreshed the place;
    While all about a meadowy ground was seen,
    Of violets mingling with the parsley green.”

Calypso recognises the messenger, for the immortals, says the poet, know
each other always. Mercury tells his errand--a bitter one for the nymph
to hear, for she has set her heart upon her mortal lover. Very hard and
envious, she says, is the Olympian tyrant, to grudge her this harmless
fancy. [She must have thought in her heart, though the poet does not
put it into words for her, that Jupiter should surely have some
sympathy for weaknesses of which he set so remarkable an example.] But
she will obey, as needs she must. Ulysses shall go; only he must build
himself a boat, for there is none in her island. She goes herself to
announce to him his coming deliverance. She finds him sitting pensively,
as is his wont, on the sea-beach, looking and longing in the direction
of Ithaca.

   “Companion of the rocks, the livelong light,
    He dreaming on the shore, but not at rest,
    With groans and tears and lingering undelight
    Gazed on the pulses of the ocean’s breast.”

His heart is in his native island; but, sooth to say, he makes the best
of his present captivity. He endures, if he does not heartily
reciprocate, the love of his fair jailer. The correspondence in many
points of these Homeric lays with the legends of mediæval Christendom,
especially with those of Arthur and his Round Table, has been already
noticed. It has been said also that, on the whole, the moral tone of
Homer is far purer. But there is one bright creation of mediæval fiction
which finds no counterpart in the song of the Greek bard. It was only
Christianity--one might almost say it was only mediæval
Christianity--which could conceive the pure ideal of the stainless
knight who has kept his maiden innocence,--who only can sit in the
“siege perilous” and win the holy Grail, “because his heart is pure.”
Among all the heroes of Iliad or Odyssey there is no Sir Galahad.

Calypso obeys the behest of Jove reluctantly, but without murmuring.
Goddess-like or woman-like, however, she cannot fail to be mortified at
the want of any reluctance on her lover’s part to leave her. There is
something touching in her expostulation:--

      “Child of Laertes, wouldst thou fain depart
      Hence to thine own dear fatherland? Farewell!
      Yet, couldst thou read the sorrow and the smart,
      With me in immortality to dwell
      Thou wouldst rejoice, and love my mansion well.
      Deeply and long thou yearnest for thy wife;
      Yet her in beauty I perchance excel.
      Beseems not one who hath but mortal life
    With forms of deathless mould to challenge a vain strife.”

Ulysses’ reply is honest and manful:--

      “All this I know and do myself avow.
      Well may Penelope in form and brow
      And stature seem inferior far to thee,
      For she is mortal, and immortal thou.
      Yet even thus ’tis very dear to me
    My long-desired return and ancient home to see.

      “But if some god amid the wine-dark flood
      With doom pursue me, and my vessel mar,
      Then will I bear it as a brave man should.
      Not the first time I suffer. Wave and war
      Deep in my life have graven many a scar.”

It cannot but be observed, however, that while Penelope’s whole thoughts
and interests are concentrated upon her absent husband, the longing of
Ulysses is rather after his fatherland than his wife. She is only one of
the many component parts of the home-scene which is ever before the
wanderer’s eyes; and not always the most important part, for his aged
father and mother and his young son seem to be at least equal objects
of anxiety. It may be urged that in this parting scene with Calypso he
is purposely reticent in the matter of his affection for Penelope, not
caring to draw down upon himself the proverbial wrath of “a woman
scorned;” and that for a similar reason he suppresses his feelings, and
quite ignores the existence of his wife, at the court of Alcinous, when
that king offers him his daughter in marriage. But there is, to say the
least, some lack of enthusiasm on the husband’s part throughout. Of the
single-hearted devotion of woman to man we have striking instances both
in Penelope and in the Andromache of the Iliad; but the devotion of man
to woman had yet long to wait for its development in the age of
chivalry.

He builds himself a boat on the island, by Calypso’s instructions, and
when all is ready, she stores it plentifully with food and wine, and
gives him directions for his voyage. He launches and sets sail; but the
angry god of the sea (irate especially against Ulysses for having
blinded his son, the giant Polyphemus, as we shall learn hereafter)
stirs winds and waves against him, wrecks his bark, and leaves him
clinging for life to a broken spar. One of the sea-nymphs, Ino, takes
pity on him, and gives him a charmed scarf--so long as he wears it his
life is safe. For two nights and days he is tossed helplessly on the
ocean; on the third, with sore wounds and bruises, he makes good his
landing on the rock-bound coast of a strange island. Utterly exhausted,
he scrapes together a bed of leaves, and creeping into it, sinks into a
profound sleep.

He awakes to find himself in a kind of faeryland. The island on which
he has been cast is Scheria,[32] inhabited by the Phæacians, whose king
and people are very far indeed from being of the ordinary type of mortal
men. Whether the poet, in his description of these Phæacian islanders,
was exercising his imagination only, or indulging his talent for satire,
is a controverted question with Homeric critics. Those who would assign
this poem of the Odyssey to a different author from the writer or
writers of the Iliad, and to a much later date than that commonly given
to Homer, have thought that in the good-humoured boastfulness of the
Phæacian character, their love of pleasure and novelty, and their
attachment to the sea, some Ionian poet was showing up, under fictitious
names, the weaknesses of his own countrymen. Others take the Phæacians
to be only another name for the Phœnicians, the sailors of all seas, who
had probably in their character somewhat of the egotism and exaggeration
which have been commonly reputed faults of men who have travelled far
and seen much. Whatever may be the true interpretation of the story, or
whether there be any interpretation at all, this curious episode in the
adventures of Ulysses is unquestionably rather comic than serious. The
names are all significant, somewhat after the fashion of those assumed
by the Red men. The king (Alcinous) is “Strong-mind,” son of “The Swift
Seaman,” and he has a brother called “Crusher of Men.” The nautical
names of his courtiers--“Prow-man” and “Stern-man,” and the rest--are as
palpably conventional as our own Tom Bowline and Captain Crosstree. The
hero’s introduction to his new hosts presents, nevertheless, one of the
most beautiful scenes in the poem. The patriarchal simplicity of the
tale cannot fail to remind the reader, as Homer so often does, of the
narratives of the earlier Scriptures.

The princess Nausicaa, daughter of the king of the Phæacians, has had a
dream. The dream--which comes as naturally to princesses, no doubt, as
to other young people--is of marriage; and in this case it could be no
possible reproach to the dreamer, since the goddess of wisdom is
represented as having herself suggested it. Nor is the dream of any
bridegroom in particular, but simply of what seems to us the very
prosaic fact that a wedding outfit, which must soon come to be thought
of, required household stores of good linen; and that the family stock
in the palace, from long disuse, stood much in need of washing. Nausicaa
awakes in the morning, and begs of her father to lend her a chariot and
a yoke of mules, that she and her maidens may go down to the shore,
where the river joins the sea, to perform this domestic duty. The
pastoral simplicity of the whole scene is charming. It has all the
freshness of those earlier ages when the business of life was so
leisurely and jovially conducted, that much of it wore the features of a
holiday. The princess and her maidens plunge the linen in the stream,
and stamp it clean with their pretty bare feet (a process which will
remind an English reader of Arlette and Robert of Normandy, and which
may be seen in operation still at many a burn-side in Scotland), and
then go themselves to bathe. An outdoor banquet forms part of the day’s
enjoyment; for the good queen, Nausicaa’s mother, has stored the wain
with delicate viands and a goat-skin of sweet wine. When this is over,
the girls begin to play at ball. Ulysses, be it remembered, is all this
while lying fast asleep under his heap of leaves, and, as it happens,
close by the spot where this merry party are disporting themselves. By
chance Nausicaa, too eager in her game, throws the ball out into the
sea; whereupon the whole chorus of handmaidens raise a cry of dismay,
which at once awakens the sleeper. He is puzzled, when he comes to
himself, to make out where he is; and still more confounded, when he
peers out from his hiding-place, to find himself in the close
neighbourhood of this bevy of joyous damsels, especially when he
bethinks himself of the very primitive style of his present costume; for
the scarf which the sea-nymph gave him us a talisman he had cast into
the sea upon his landing, as she had especially charged him. But Ulysses
is far too old a traveller to allow an over-punctilious modesty to stand
in his way when he is in danger of starving. He has no idea of missing
this opportunity of supplying his wants merely because he has lost his
wardrobe. He extemporises some very slight covering out of an
olive-bough, and, in this strange attire, makes his sudden appearance
before the party. Nausicaa’s maidens all scream and take to flight--very
excusably; but the king’s daughter, with a true nobility, stands firm.
She sees only a shipwrecked man, and “to the pure all things are pure.”
Ulysses is a courtier as well as a traveller, and knows much of “cities
and men;” and it is not the flattery of a suppliant, but the quick
discernment of a man of the world, which makes him at once assign her
true rank to the fair stranger who stands before him. He remains at a
respectful distance, while, in the language of Eastern compliment, he
compares her to the young palm-tree for grace and beauty, and invokes
the blessing of the gods upon her marriage-hour, if she will take pity
on his miserable case. Nausicaa recalls her fugitive attendants, and
rebukes them for their folly, reminding them that “the stranger and the
poor are the messengers of the gods.” The shipwrecked hero is supplied
at once with food and drink and raiment; and when he reappears, after
having bathed and clothed himself, it is with a mien and stature more
majestic than his wont, with the “hyacinthine locks” of immortal youth
flowing round his stately shoulders--such grace does his guardian
goddess bestow upon him, that he may find favour in the sight of the
Phæacian princess. She looks upon him now with simple and undisguised
admiration, confessing aside to her handmaidens that, when her time for
marriage _does_ come, she should wish for just such a husband as this
godlike stranger. There is nothing unmaidenly in such language from the
lips of Nausicaa. To remain unmarried was a reproach in her day,
whatever it may be in ours, and a reproach not likely to fall upon a
king’s daughter; so, looking upon the marriage state as inevitable, and
at her age very near at hand, she thinks and speaks of it unreservedly
to her companions. Our modern conventional silence on such topics arises
in great degree from the fact that a perpetual maidenhood is the
inevitable lot of far too many in our over-civilised society, and, being
inevitable, is no reproach. It does not consort, therefore, with
maidenly dignity to express any interest about marriage, for which an
opportunity may never be offered.

But Nausicaa is at least as careful to observe the proprieties,
according to her own view of them, as any modern young lady. She will
promise the shipwrecked stranger a welcome at her father’s court; but he
must by no means ride home in the wain with her, or even be seen
entering the city in her company. So Ulysses runs by the side of her
mules, and waits in a sacred grove near the city gates, until the
princess and her party have re-entered the palace. When they have
disappeared, he issues forth, and meets a girl carrying a pitcher. It is
once more his guardian goddess in disguise. She veils him in a mist, so
that he passes the streets unquestioned by the natives (who have no love
for strangers), and stands at last in the presence of King Alcinous.

The king of the Phæacians, as well as his queen, boast to be descended
from Neptune. His subjects therefore, are, as has been said,
emphatically a seagoing people. Ulysses has already seen with
admiration, as he passed,

   “The smooth wide havens, and the glorious fleet,
     Wherewith those mariners the great deep tire.”

Their galleys, moreover, are unlike any barks that ever walked the seas
except in a poet’s imagination. King Alcinous himself describes them:--

     “For unto us no pilots appertain,
      Rudder nor helm which other barks obey.
      These, ruled by reason, their own course essay
      Sharing men’s mind. Cities and climes they know,
      And through the deep sea-gorges cleaving way,
      Wrapt in an ambient vapour, to and fro
    Sail in a fearless scorn of scathe or overthrow.”

The wondrous art of navigation might well seem nothing less than
miraculous in an age when all the forces of nature were personified as
gods. So, when the great ship Argo carried out her crew of ancient
heroes on what was the first voyage of discovery, the fable ran that in
her prow was set a beam cut from the oak of Dodona, which had the gift
of speech, and gave the voyagers oracles in their distress. Our English
Spenser must have had these Phæacian ships in mind when he describes the
“gondelay” which bears the enchantress Phædria:--

     “Eftsoone her shallow ship away did slide,
      More swift than swallow sheres the liquid sky,
      Withouten oar or pilot it to guide,
      Or winged canvass with the wind to fly;
      Only she turned a pin, and by-and-by
      It cut a way upon the yielding wave,
      (Ne cared she her course for to apply)
      For it was taught the way which she would have,
    And both from rocks and flats itself could wisely save.”

As the men of Phæacia excel all others in seamanship, so also do the
women in the feminine accomplishments of weaving and embroidery. But
they are not, as they freely confess, a nation of warriors: they love
the feast and the dance and the song, and care little for what other men
call glory. The palace of Alcinous and its environs are all in
accordance with this luxurious type of character. All round the palace
lie gardens and orchards, which rejoice in an enchanted climate, under
whose influence their luscious products ripen in an unfailing
succession:--

     “There in full prime the orchard-trees grow tall,
      Sweet fig, pomegranate, apple fruited fair,
      Pear and the healthful olive. Each and all
      Both summer droughts and chills of winter spare;
      All the year round they flourish. Some the air
      Of Zephyr warms to life, some doth mature.
      Apple grows old on apple, pear on pear,
      Fig follows fig, vintage doth vintage lure;
    Thus the rich revolution doth for aye endure.”

When the traveller enters within the palace itself, he finds himself
surrounded with equal wonders.

     “For, like the sun’s fire or the moon’s, a light
      Far streaming through the high-roofed house did pass
      From the long basement to the topmost height.
      There on each side ran walls of flaming brass,
      Zoned on the summit with a blue bright mass
      Of cornice; and the doors were framed of gold;
      Where, underneath, the brazen floor doth glass
      Silver pilasters, which with grace uphold
    Lintel of silver framed; the ring was burnished gold.

     “And dogs on each side of the doors there stand,
      Silver and gold, the which in ancient day
      Hephæstus wrought with cunning brain and hand,
      And set for sentinels to hold the way.
      Death cannot tame them, nor the years decay.
      And from the shining threshold thrones were set,
      Skirting the walls in lustrous long array,
      On to the far room, where the women met,
    With many a rich robe strewn and woven coverlet.

     “There the Phæacian chieftains eat and drink,
      While golden youths on pedestals upbear
      Each in his outstretched hand a lighted link,
      Which nightly on the royal feast doth flare.
      And in the house are fifty handmaids fair;
      Some in the mill the yellow corn grind small;
      Some ply the looms, and shuttles twirl, which there
      Flash like the quivering leaves of aspen tall;
    And from the close-spun weft the trickling oil will fall.”

King Alcinous sits on his golden throne, “quaffing his wine like a god.”
His queen, Arete, sits beside him, weaving yarn of the royal purple.
Warned by his kind friend the princess, Ulysses passes by the king’s
seat, and falls at the feet of the queen. In the court of
Phæacia--whether the story be disguised fact or pure fiction, whether
the poet was satiric or serious--the ruling influence lies with the
women. The mist in which Minerva had enveloped his person melts away;
and while all gaze in astonishment at his sudden appearance, he claims
hospitality as a shipwrecked wanderer, and then, after the fashion of
suppliants, seats himself on the hearth-stone. The hospitality of
Alcinous is prompt and magnificent. He bids one of his sons rise up and
cede the place of honour to the stranger. If he be mortal man, the boon
he asks shall be granted; but it may be that he is one of the immortals,
who, as he gravely assures his guest, often condescend to come down and
share the banquets of the Phæacians, and make themselves known to them
face to face. Ulysses assures his royal host, in a passage which is in
itself sufficient to mark the subdued comedy of the episode, that far
from having any claim to divinity, he is very mortal indeed, and wholly
taken up at present with one of the most inglorious of mortal
cravings:--

     “Nothing more shameless is than Appetite,
      Who still, whatever anguish load our breast,
      Makes us remember, in our own despite,
      Both food and drink. Thus I, thrice wretched wight,
      Carry of inward grief surpassing store,
      Yet she constrains me with superior might,
      Wipes clean away the memory-written score,
    And takes whate’er I give, and taking, craveth more.”[33]

There is every appliance to satisfy appetite, however, in the luxurious
halls of Alcinous. While Ulysses is seated at table, Queen Arete,
careful housewife as she is with all her royalty, marks with some
curiosity that the raiment which their strange guest wears must have
come from her own household stores--so well does she know the work of
herself and her handmaidens. This leads to a confession on Ulysses’ part
of his previous interview with Nausicaa, whom he praises, as he had good
right to do, as wise beyond her years. So charmed is the king with his
guest’s taste and discernment, that he at once declares that nothing
would please him better than to retain him at his court in the
character of a son-in-law. Ulysses (whose fate it is throughout his
wanderings to make himself only too interesting to the fair sex
generally) is by this time too much accustomed to such proposals to show
any embarrassment. With his usual diplomacy he puts the question
aside--bowing his acknowledgments only, it may be, though Homer does not
tell us even so much as this. The one point to which he addresses
himself is the king’s promise to send him safe home, which he accepts
with thankfulness. Before they retire for the night, the queen herself
does not disdain to give special orders for their guest’s accommodation.
She bids her maidens prepare

      “A couch beneath the echoing corridor,
      And thereon spread the crimson carpets fair,
      Then the wide coverlets of richness rare,
      And to arrange the blankets warm and white,
      Wherein who sleepeth straight forgets his care.
      They then, each holding in her hand a light,
    From the great hall pass forth, and spread the robes aright.”

The combination of magnificence with simplicity is of a wholly Oriental
character. The appliances of the court might be those of a modern
Eastern potentate; yet the queen is a thrifty housekeeper, the
princess-royal superintends the family wash, and the five sons of the
royal family, when their sister comes home, themselves come forward and
unyoke her mules from the wain which has brought home the linen.

The next day is devoted to feasting and games in honour of the stranger.
Amongst the company sits the blind minstrel Demodocus, in whose person
it has been thought that the poet describes himself--

      “Whom the Muse loved, and gave him good and ill;
      Ill, that of light she did his eyes deprive,
      Good, that sweet minstrelsies divine at will
      She lent him, and a voice men’s ears to thrill.
      For him Pontonous silver-studded chair
      Set with the feasters, leaning it with skill
      Against the column, and with tender care
    Made the blind fingers feel the harp suspended there.”

Such honour has the bard in all lands. The king’s son does not disdain
to guide “the blind fingers;” and when the song is over, the herald
leads him carefully to his place at the banquet, where his portion is of
the choicest--“the chine of the white-tusked boar.” The subject of his
lay is the tale which charms all hearers--Phæacian, Greek, or Roman,
ancient or modern, then as now--the tale of Troy. Touched with the
remembrances which the song awakens, Ulysses wraps his face in his
mantle to hide his rising tears. The king marks his guest’s emotion: too
courteous to allude to it, he contents himself with rising at once from
the banquet-table, and giving order for the sports to begin. Foot-race,
wrestling, quoit-throwing, and boxing, all have their turn; and in all
the king’s’ sons take their part, not unsuccessfully. It is suggested at
last that the stranger, who stands silently looking on, should exhibit
some feat of strength or skill. Ulysses declines--he has no heart just
now for pastimes. Then one of the young Phæacians, Euryalus, who has
just won the wrestling-match, gives vent to an ungracious taunt. Their
guest, he says, is plainly no hero, nor versed in the noble science of
athletics; he must be some skipper of a merchantman, “whose talk is all
of cargoes.” He brings down upon himself a grand rebuke from Ulysses:--

      “Man, thou hast not said well; a fool thou art.
      Not all fair gifts to all doth God divide,
      Eloquence, beauty, and a noble heart.
      One seems in mien poor, but his feebler part
      God crowns with language, that men learn to love
      The form, so feelingly the sweet words dart
      Within them. First in councils he doth prove,
    And, ’mid the crowd observant, like a god doth move.

      “Another, though in mould of form and face
      Like the immortal gods he seems to be,
      Hath no wise word to crown the outward grace
      So is thine aspect fair exceedingly,
      Wherein no blemish even a god might see;
      Yet is thine understanding wholly vain.”

Then the hero who has thrown the mighty Ajax in the wrestling-ring, who
is swifter of foot than any Greek except Achilles, and who has been
awarded that matchless hero’s arms as the prize of valour against all
competitors,--rises in his wrath, and gives his gay entertainers a taste
of his quality. Not deigning even to throw off his mantle, he seizes a
huge stone quoit, and hurls it, after a single swing, far beyond the
point reached by any of the late competitors. The astonished islanders
crouch to the ground as it sings through the air above their heads. Once
roused, Ulysses launches out into the self-assertion which has been
remarked as being common to all the heroes of Homeric story. He
challenges the whole circle of bystanders to engage with him in
whatsoever contest they will--

    “All feats I know that are beneath the sun.”

He will not, indeed, compare himself with some of the heroes of old,
such as were Hercules and Eurytus;

   “But of all else I swear that I stand first,
    Such men as now upon the earth eat bread.”

None of the Phæacians will accept the challenge. The king commends the
spirit in which the stranger has repelled the insult of Euryalus, and
with the gay good-humour which marks the Phæacian character, confesses
that in feats of strength his nation can claim no real excellence, but
only in speed of foot and in seamanship; or, above all, in the dance--in
this no men can surpass them. His guest shall see and judge. Nine grave
elders, by the king’s command (and here the satire is evident, even if
we have lost the application) stand forth as masters of the ceremonies,
and clear the lists for dancing. A band of selected youths perform an
elaborate ballet, while the minstrel Demodocus sings to his harp a
sportive lay, not over-delicate, of the stolen loves of Mars and Venus,
and their capture in the cunning net of Vulcan. If it must be granted
that this song forms a strong exception to the purity of Homer’s muse,
it has also been fairly pleaded for him, that it is introduced as
characteristic of an unwarlike nation and an effeminate society. But
even in his lightest mood the poet has no sort of sympathy with a
wife’s unfaithfulness. He takes his gods and goddesses as he found them
in the popular creed; bad enough, and far worse than the mortal men and
women of his own poetical creation. But his own morals are far higher
than those of Olympus. Even in this questionable ballad of the Phæacian
minstrel the point of the jest is in strong contrast to some of the
comedies of a more modern school. It is on the detected culprits, not on
the injured husband, that the ridicule of gods and men is mercilessly
showered. When the ballet is concluded, two of the king’s sons, at their
father’s bidding, perform a sort of minuet, in which ball-play is
introduced. Ulysses expresses his admiration of the whole performance in
words which sound like solemn irony:--

   “O king, pre-eminent in word and deed,
    Of late thy lips the threatening vaunt did make
    That these thy dancers all the world exceed--
    Now have I seen fulfilment of thy rede;
    Yea, wonder holds me while I gaze thereon.”

So all passes off with pleasant compliments between hosts and guest. The
king and his twelve peers present Ulysses with costly gifts, and
Euryalus, in pledge of regret for his late unseemly speech, offers his
own silver-hilted sword with its ivory scabbard.

From the games they pass again to the banquet; and one more glimpse is
given us of the gentle Nausicaa, perfectly in keeping with the maiden
guilelessness of her character. Ulysses--still radiant with the more
than human beauty which the goddess has bestowed upon him--moves to his
place in the hall.

      “He from the bath, cleansed from the dust of toil,
      Passed to the drinkers; and Nausicaa there
      Stood, moulded by the gods exceeding fair.
      She on the roof-tree pillar leaning, heard
      Odysseus; turning, she beheld him near.
      Deep in her breast admiring wonder stirred,
    And in a low sweet voice she spake this winged word.

      “‘Hail, stranger-guest! when fatherland and wife
      Thou shalt revisit, then remember me,
      Since to me first thou owest the price of life.’
      And to the royal virgin answered he:
      ‘Child of a generous sire, if willed it be
      By Thunderer Zeus, who all dominion hath,
      That I my home and dear return yet see,
      There at thy shrine will I devote my breath,
    There worship thee, dear maid, my saviour from dark death.’”

It is not easy to discover, with any certainty, what the Greek poet
meant us to understand as to the feelings of Nausicaa towards Ulysses.
It has been said that Love, in the complex modern acceptation of the
term, is unknown to the Greek poets. Nor is there, in this passage, any
approach to the expression of such a feeling on the part of the
princess. Yet, had the scene found place in the work of a modern poet,
we should have understood at once that, without any kind of reproach to
the perfect maidenly delicacy of Nausicaa, it was meant to show us the
dawn of a tender sentiment--nothing more--towards the stranger-guest
whom the gods had endowed with such majestic graces of person, who stood
so high above all rivals in feats of strength and skill, whose
misfortunes surrounded him with a double interest, and, above all, in
whom she felt a kind of personal property as his deliverer.

The Greek historian Plutarch chivalrously defends the young princess
from the charge of forwardness, which ungallant critics brought against
her as early as his day. It was no marvel, he says, that she knew and
valued a hero when she saw him, and preferred him to the carpet-knights
of her own country, who were good only at the dance and the banquet. But
with her it was, after all, a sentiment, and no more; but which might
have ripened into love, under other circumstances, had the hero of her
maiden fancy been as free to choose as she was.

So vanishes from the page one of the sweetest creations of Greek
fiction--the more charming to us, as coming nearest, perhaps, of all to
the modern type of feeling. The farewell to Nausicaa is briefly said;
and Ulysses, sitting by King Alcinous at the banquet, pays a high
compliment to the blind minstrel, and gives him a new theme for song.
Since he knows so well the story of the great Siege, let him now take
his lyre, and sing to them of the wondrous Horse. Demodocus obeys. He
sings how the Greeks, hopeless of taking Troy by force of arms, had
recourse at last to stratagem: how they constructed a huge framework in
the shape of a horse, ostensibly an offering to the gods, and then set
fire to their sea-camp, and sailed away--for home, to all
appearance--leaving an armed company hidden in the womb of the wooden
monster; how the Trojans, after much doubt, dragged it inside their
walls, and how, in the night-time, the Greeks issued from their strange
ambush, and spread fire and sword through the devoted city. And all
along Ulysses is the hero of the lay. He is the leader of the venturous
band who thus carried their lives in their hands into the midst of their
enemies: he it is who, “like unto Mars,” storms the house of Deiphobus,
who had taken Helen to wife after the death of his brother Paris, and
restores the Spartan princess to her rightful lord. Tears of emotion
again fill the listener’s eyes; and again the courteous king bids the
minstrel cease, when he sees that some chord of mournful remembrance is
struck in the heart of his guest. But he now implores him, as he has
good right to do, to tell them who he really is. Why does the Tale of
Troy so move him? The answer, replies the stranger, will be a long tale,
and sad to tell; but his very name, he proudly says, is a history--“I am
Ulysses, son of Laertes!”





ULYSSES TELLS HIS STORY TO ALCINOUS.


The narrative, which Ulysses proceeds to relate to his host, takes back
his story to the departure of the Greek fleet from Troy. First, on his
homeward course, he and his comrades had landed on the coast of Thrace,
and laid waste the town of the Ciconians. Instead of putting to sea
again with their plunder, the crews stayed to feast on the captured
beeves and the red wine. “Wrapt in the morning mist,” large bodies of
the natives surprised them at this disadvantage, and they had to
re-embark with considerable loss. This was the beginning of their
troubles. They were rounding the southern point of Greece, when a storm
bore them out far to sea, and not until sunset on the tenth day did they
reach an unknown shore--the land of the Lotus-eaters--

      “Who, on the green earth couched beside the main,
    Seemed ever with sweet food their lips to entertain.”

To determine the geography of the place is as difficult as to ascertain
the natural history of the lotus, though critics have been very
confident in doing both.[34] The effect of the seductive food on the
companions of Ulysses is thus described:--

      “And whoso tasted of their flowery meat
      Cared not with tidings to return, but clave
      Fast to that tribe, for ever fain to eat,
    Reckless of home-return, the tender Lotus sweet.”

Those who ate of it had to be dragged back by main force to their
galleys, and bound fast with thongs, so loath were they to leave that
shore of peaceful rest and forgetfulness. In the words of our own poet,
who has founded one of the most imaginative of his poems on this
incident of Ulysses’ voyage, so briefly told by Homer--

   “Most weary seemed the sea, weary the oar,
    Weary the wandering fields of barren foam.
    Then some one said--‘We will return no more:’
    And all at once they sang--‘Our island-home
    Is far beyond the wave; we will no longer roam.’”[35]

It has been thought that here we have possibly the bread-fruit tree of
the South Sea Islands, with some hint of the effect produced by their
soft and enervating climate, and that the voyage of Ulysses anticipated
in some degree the discoveries of Anson and Cook. It is curious that, in
Cook’s case, the seductions of those islands gave him the same trouble
as they did Ulysses; for several of his crew thought, like the Greek
sailors, that they had found an earthly paradise for which they
determined to forget home and country, and had to be brought back to
their ship by force. But the lotus-land of the poet is an ideal shore,
to which some of us moderns may have travelled as well as Ulysses. Its
deepest recesses will have been reached by the Buddhist who attains his
coveted state of perfect beatitude, the “Nirvâna,” in which a man has
found out that all having and being, and more especially doing, are a
mistake. It is the _dolce far niente_ of the Italian; the region free
from all cares and responsibilities--“beyond the domain of
conscience”--which Charles Lamb, half in jest and half in earnest,
sighed for.

Bearing away from the shore of the Lotus-eaters, Ulysses and his crew
next reached the island where the Cyclops dwell--a gigantic tribe of
rude shepherds, monsters in form, having but one eye planted in the
centre of their foreheads, who know neither laws, nor arts, nor
commerce. Adventure and discovery have always a charm for Ulysses; and
it was with no other motive, as he pretty plainly confesses, that he
landed with his own ship’s crew to explore these unknown regions. The
present adventure had a horrible conclusion for some of his companions.
Alone, in a vast cave near the shore, dwelt the giant Polyphemus, a son
of Neptune the sea-god, and folded his flocks in its deep recesses. They
did not find the monster within: but the pails of brimming milk, and
huge piles of cheese, stood ranged in order round the walls of the
cavern. Nothing would satisfy Ulysses but to await the owner’s return.
At evening he came, driving his flocks before him; and, as was his wont,
began to busy himself in his dairy operations. By the red glow of the
firelight he soon discovered the intruders, as they crouched in a
corner. In vain they made appeal to his hospitality, reminding him that
strangers were under the special care of Jupiter. What care the Cyclops
race for the gods? So he seized two of the unhappy Greeks, dashed them
on the ground--“like puppies”--devoured them, blood, bones, and all,
after the manner of giants, and washed down his horrible supper with
huge bowls of milk. Two more furnished him with breakfast in the
morning. But the craft of Ulysses was more than a match for the savage.
He had carried with him on his dangerous expedition (having a kind of
presentiment that it would prove useful) a skin of wine of rare quality
and potency, and of this he gave Polyphemus to drink after his last
cannibal meal. Charmed with the delicious draught, the giant begged to
know his benefactor’s name. The answer of Ulysses is the oldest specimen
on record of the art of punning.

      “‘Hear then; my name is Noman. From of old
      My father, mother, these my comrades bold,
      Give me this title.’ So I spake, and he
      Answered at once with mind of ruthless mould:
      ‘This shall fit largess unto Noman be--
    Last, after all thy peers, I promise to eat thee.”

Then, overcome by the potent drink, the savage lay down to sleep.
Ulysses had prepared the thin end of a huge club of olive-wood, and
this, pointed and well hardened in the fire, he and his comrades thrust
into his single eye-ball, boring it deep in, “as the shipwright doth an
auger.” Roaring with pain, and now fairly sobered, Polyphemus awoke, and
shouted for help to his brother-Cyclops who dwelt in the neighbouring
valleys. They came; but to all their questions as to what was the
matter, or who had injured him, he only answered “_Noman!_”--and his
friends turned away in disgust. After groping vainly round the cave in
search of his tormentors, Polyphemus rolled the huge stone from the
mouth of his den, and let his sheep go out, feeling among them for his
captives, who would probably try thus to escape. But again the wit of
the Ithacan chief proved too subtle for his enemy. The great sheep had
been cunningly linked together three abreast, and every middle sheep
carried a Greek tied under his belly; Ulysses, after tying the last of
his companions, clinging fast to the wool of a huge ram, the king of the
flock. So did they all escape to rejoin their anxious comrades. But when
all had embarked, and rowed to a safe distance, then Ulysses stood high
upon his deck, and shouted a taunting defiance to his enemy. The answer
of Polyphemus was a huge rock hurled with all his might towards the
voice, which fell just short of the vessel. Again Ulysses shouted, and
bade him tell those who should hereafter ask him who did the deed, that
it was even Ulysses the Ithacan. The Cyclops groaned with rage and
grief--an ancient oracle had forewarned him of the name; but will the
great Ulysses please to return, that he may entertain such a hero
handsomely? He would have shown himself more simple than his enemy if he
had. Then the blind monster lifted his cry to his great father the
Sea-god, and implored his vengeance on his destroyer.

The one-eyed giant of Homer’s story became a very popular comic
character in classical fiction. The only specimen of the old Greek
satyric drama, as it was called--a peculiar kind of comedy, in which
satyrs were largely introduced--is a play by Euripides, ‘The Cyclops,’
in which the principal incident is the blinding of Polyphemus by
Ulysses. The monster rushes out of his cave, with his eye-socket burnt
and bleeding, and stretches his arms across the entrance to intercept
the escape of Ulysses, who creeps out between his legs. He roars out
with pain, and is taunted by the “Chorus,”--a party of satyrs whom he
has made his slaves, and who now rejoice in their deliverance.

“_Chorus._ Why make this bawling, Cyclops?

_Cyclops._                                 I am lost!

_Ch._ Thou’rt dirty, anyhow.

_Cyc._                       Yea, and wretched too!

_Ch._ What! hast got drunk, and fallen into the fire?

_Cyc._ Noman hath slain me!

_Ch._                       Then thou’rt wronged by no man.

_Cyc._ Noman hath blinded me!

_Ch._                          Then thou’rt not blind.

_Cyc._ Would ye were so!--

_Ch._                      Why, how could _no man_ blind thee?

_Cyc._ Ye mock me.--Where is Noman?

_Ch._                               Nowhere, Cyclops.

_Cyc._ O friends, if ye would know the truth, yon wretch
       Hath been my ruin--gave me drink, and drowned me!

_Ch._ Ay--wine is strong, we know, and hard to deal with.

The poet Theocritus, in one of his Idylls, gives us Polyphemus, before
his blindness, in love with the beautiful nymph Galatæa, who, having
another lover with two eyes in the young shepherd Acis, does not
encourage the addresses of the Cyclops. This is part of his
remonstrance:--

   “I know, sweet maiden, why thou art so coy;
    Shaggy and huge, a single eyebrow spans
    From ear to ear my forehead, whence one eye
    Gleams, and an o’er-broad nostril o’er my lip.
    Yet I--this monster--feed a thousand sheep,
    That yield me sweetest draughts at milking-tide.

           *       *       *       *       *

    But thou mislik’st my hair?--Well, oaken logs
    Are here, and embers yet a-glow with fire;
    Burn, if thou wilt, my heart out, and my eye--
    My lonely eye, wherein is my delight.”
            --Theocritus, Idyll xi. (Calverley’s transl.)

This love-story of the Cyclops is better known, perhaps, to English
readers, through Handel’s Pastoral, ‘Acis and Galatæa.’

The imprecation of Polyphemus was heard, and Ulysses was long to suffer
the penalty of his bold deed. Yet, but for the weakness of his comrades,
he might perhaps have escaped it. For, as they sailed on over unknown
seas, they won the friendship of the King of the Winds. He feasted them
a whole month on his brass-bound island; and he, too, like all the world
of gods and men, asked eagerly for the last news of the heroes of Troy.
So charmed was Æolus with his guest, that on his departure he presented
Ulysses with an ox-hide tied with a silver cord, in which all the winds
were safely confined, save only Zephyr, who was left loose to waft the
voyagers safely home. So for nine days and nights they ran straight for
Ithaca, Ulysses himself at the helm, for he would trust it to no other
hand. And now they had come in sight of the rocks of their beloved
island--so near that they could see the smoke go up from the herdsmen’s
camp-fires; when, overcome with long watching, the chief fell asleep
upon the deck. Then the greed and curiosity of his companions tempted
them to examine the ox-hide bag. It must be some rich treasure, surely,
thus carefully tied up and stowed away. They opened it; out rushed the
imprisoned blasts, and drove them back in miserable plight to the island
of Æolus,--much to that monarch’s astonishment. In vain did Ulysses tell
his unlucky story, and beg further help from the ruler of the storms;
Æolus would have nothing more to do with such an ill-starred wretch,
upon whom there rested so manifestly the curse of heaven, but drove him
and his companions out to sea again with ignominy.

A second time the voyagers fell into the hands of cannibals. They moored
their ships in the harbour of the Læstrygonians,--in the description of
which there has been lately traced a strong likeness to the bay of
Balaclava--

                      “A rock-surrounded bay,
    Whence fronting headlands at the mouth outrun,
    Leaving a little narrow entrance-way,
    Wherethrough they drive the vessels one by one.”

These Læstrygonians were a giant race, like the Cyclops, and of an
equally barbarous character. One of the exploring party, whom Ulysses
sent to reconnoitre, they seized and devoured on the spot, and then
hurled rocks down on the ships as they lay moored in the land-locked
harbour, and speared the unfortunate crews, “like fish,” as they swam
from the wrecks. Ulysses only had moored outside, and escaped with his
single ship by cutting his cable.

Pursuing his sad voyage, he had reached the island of Ææa, where dwelt
the enchantress Circe “of the bright hair,” daughter of the Sun. Here he
divided his small remaining force into two bands, one of which, under
his lieutenant, Eurylochus, explored the interior of the island, while
Ulysses and the rest kept guard by their ship. Hidden deep in the woods,
they came upon the palace of Circe.

      “Wolves of the mountain all around the way,
      And lions, softened by the spells divine,
      As each her philters had partaken, lay.
      These cluster round the men’s advancing line
      Fawning like dogs, who, when their lord doth dine,
      Wait till he issues from the banquet-hall,
      And for the choice gifts which his hands assign
      Fawn, for he ne’er forgets them--so these all
    Fawn on our friends, whom much the unwonted sights appal.

      “Soon at her vestibule they pause, and hear
      A voice of singing from a lovely place,
      Where Circe weaves her great web year by year,
      So shining, slender, and instinct with grace
      As weave the daughters of immortal race.”

The abode of Circe presents quite a different picture from the grotto of
Calypso.[36] There, all the beauties were those of nature in her
untouched luxuriance; here we have all the splendour of an Oriental
interior, enriched with elaborate art--wide halls of polished marble,
silver-studded couches, and vessels of gold.

Throwing wide the shining doors, the enchantress gaily bade them enter;
and all, save only the more prudent Eurylochus, accepted the invitation.
They drank of her drugged cup; then she struck them with her wand, and
lo! they became swine in form, yet retaining their human senses.
Eurylochus, after long watching in vain for the reappearance of his
comrades, returned alone with his strange tale to his chief, who at once
set forth to the rescue. On his way through the forest, he was suddenly
accosted by a fair youth, bearing a wand of gold--none other than the
god Mercury--who gave him a root of wondrous virtue--

    “Black, with a milk-white flower, in heavenly tongue
     Called Moly.”[37]

Armed with this, he can defy all Circe’s enchantments. She mixed for him
the same draught, struck him with her wand, and bid him “go herd with
his companions;” but potion and spell had lost their power. Circe had
found her master, and knew it could be no other than “the many-wiled
Ulysses,” of whose visit she had been forewarned. Not even the magic
virtues of the herb Moly, however, enable him to resist her proffered
love; and Ulysses, by his own confession, forgot Penelope in the halls
of Circe, as afterwards in the island of Calypso. It may be offered as
his apology, that it was absolutely necessary for him to make himself
agreeable to his hostess, in order to obtain from her (as he does at
once) the deliverance of his companions from her toils; but this does
not explain his sending for the rest of his crew from the ship, and
spending a whole year in her society. The ingenious critics who insist
on shaping a moral allegory out of the story of the Odyssey confess to
having found a stumbling-block in this point of the narrative. It sounds
very plausible to say that in Circe is personified sensual pleasure;
that those who partake of her cup, and are turned into swine, are those
who brutalise themselves by such indulgences; that the herb Moly--black
at the root, but white and beautiful in the blossom--symbolises
“instruction” or “temperance,” by which the temptations of sense are to
be resisted. But Ulysses’ victory over the enchantress, and his
subsequent relations to her, fall in but awkwardly with any moral of any
kind. To say that Ulysses knows how to indulge his appetites with
moderation, and therefore escapes the penalties of excess--that he is
the master of Pleasure, while his companions become its slaves--is to
make the parable teach a very questionable form of morality indeed,
since it represents self-indulgence as praiseworthy, if we can only
manage to escape the consequences.

But it was not until Ulysses had been reminded by his companions that he
was forgetting his fatherland, that he besought his fair entertainer to
let him go. Reluctantly she consented, bound by her oath--warning him,
as they parted, that toil and peril lay before him, and that if he would
learn his future fate, he must visit the Regions of the Dead, and there
consult the shade of the great prophet Tiresias.

Ulysses goes on to describe to the king of the Phæacians his voyage on
from the island of Ææa, under the favouring gales which Circe sends
him:--

     “All the day long the silvery foam we clave,
      Wind in the well-stretched canvas following free,
      Till the sun stooped beneath the western wave,
      And darkness veiled the spaces of the sea.
      Then to the limitary land came we
      Of the sea-river, streaming deep, where dwell,
      Shrouded in mist and gloom continually,
      That people, from sweet light secluded well,
    The dark Cimmerian tribe, who skirt the realms of hell.”

Who these Cimmerians were is not easily discoverable. Their name was
held by the Greeks a synonym for all that was dark and barbarous in the
mists of antiquity. It appears, nevertheless, in the earlier historians
as the appellation of a real people; some rash ethnologists, tempted
chiefly by the similarity of name, have tried to identify them with the
Cymry--the early settlers of Wales. The Welsh are notoriously proud of
their ancient origin, but it is doubtful how far they would accept the
poet’s description of their ancestral darkness, or the neighbourhood to
which he here assigns them.






THE TALE CONTINUED--THE VISIT TO THE SHADES.


The eleventh book of the poem, in which Ulysses goes down to the Shades
to consult the Dead, has been considered by some good authorities as a
later interpolation into the tale. The solemn grandeur of the whole
episode is remarked as out of character with the light and easy
narrative into which it has been woven. Be this as it may, the passage
has a strong interest in itself. It is the solitary glimpse which we
have of the poet’s creed as to the state of disembodied spirits. It is
at least not in contradiction to the views which are disclosed--scantily
enough--by the author of the Iliad, though here we find them
considerably more developed. It is a gloomy picture at the best; and we
almost cease to wonder at the shrinking from death which is so often
displayed by the Homeric heroes, when we find their future state
represented as something almost worse, to an active mind, than
annihilation.

    “Never the Sun that giveth light to men
     Looks down upon them with his golden eye,
     Or when he climbs the starry arch, or when
     Slope toward the earth he wheels adown the sky;
     But sad night weighs upon them wearily.”

They reached the spot, says Ulysses, described to him at parting by
Circe, where the dark rivers Acheron and Cocytus mix at the entrance
into Hades. The incantations which she had carefully enjoined were duly
made; a black ram and ewe were offered to the powers of darkness, and
their blood poured into the trench which he had dug--“a cubit every
way.”

     “Forthwith from Erebus a phantom crowd
      Loomed forth, the shadowy people of the dead,--
      Old men, with load of earthly anguish bowed,
      Brides in their bloom cut off, and youths unwed,
      Virgins whose tender eyelids then first shed
      True sorrow, men with gory arms renowned,
      Pierced by the sharp sword on the death-plain red.
      All these flock darkling with a hideous sound,
    Lured by the scent of blood, the open trench around.”

But he had been charged by Circe not to allow the ghastly crew to slake
their thirst, until he had evoked the shade of Tiresias, the blind
prophet of Thebes, who retained his art and his honours even in these
regions of the dead. So he kept them off with his sword,--not suffering
even the phantom of his dead mother Anticleia, who came among the rest,
to taste, until the great prophet appeared, leaning on his golden staff.

                          “To the bloody brink
    He stooped, and with his shadowy lips made shrink
    The sacrificial pool that darkling lay
    Beneath him.”

From the lips of Tiresias Ulysses has learnt the future which awaits
him. On the coast of Sicily he should find pasturing the herds and
flocks of the Sun: if he and his comrades left them uninjured, they
should soon see again their native Ithaca; if they laid sacrilegious
hands on them, he alone should escape, and reach home after long
suffering.

The shade of his mother has been sitting meanwhile in gloomy silence,
eyeing the coveted blood. Not until she had drank of it might she open
her lips to speak, or have power to recognise her son. To his eager
inquiries as to her own fate and that of his father Laertes she made
answer that she herself had died of grief, and that the old man was
wearing out a joyless life in bitter anxiety.

    “Therewith she ended, and a deep unrest
     Urged me to clasp the spirit of the dead,
     And fold a phantom to my yearning breast.
     Thrice I essayed, with eager hands out-spread
     Thrice like a shadow or a dream she fled,
     And my hands closed on unsubstantial air.”

As they talked together, there swept forth out of the gloom a crowd of
female shapes--the mothers of the mighty men of old. There came Tyro,
beloved by the sea-god Neptune, from whom sprang Neleus, father of
Nestor: next followed Antiope, who bore to Jupiter Amphion and Zethus,
who built the seven-gated Thebes; Iphimedeia, mother of the giants Otus
and Ephialtes, who strove to take heaven itself by storm; Alcmena, Leda,
Ariadne, and a crowd of the heroines of Greek romance, who had found the
loves of the gods more or less disastrous in their earthly lot, and who
were reaping, in the gloomy immortality which the poet assigns them,
such consolation as they might from knowing themselves the mothers of
heroes.

Here Ulysses would have ended his tale, and for a while a charmed
silence falls upon his Phæacian audience. But the king would hear more.
Did he see, in the realms of the dead, no one of those renowned
champions who had fought with him at Troy?

Yes--if his host cares to listen, Ulysses can tell him a sad tale of
some of his old comrades. He saw the great Agamemnon there, and heard
from his lips the treachery of the adulterous Clytemnestra. Antilochus
and Patroclus, too, he had recognised, and Ajax; but the latter,
retaining in the world below the animosities of earthly life, had stood
far aloof, and sullenly refused to speak a word in answer to his
successful rival. The only one who reveals anything of the secrets of
his prison-house is Achilles. He asks of his adventurous visitor what
has prompted him to risk this intrusion into the gloomy dwelling, where
the dead live indeed, but without thought or purpose, mere shadows of
what they were. And when Ulysses attempts to comfort him with the
thought of the deathless glory which surrounds his name, the
hopelessness of his answer sets forth, in the darkest colours, that
gloomy view of human destiny which breaks out from time to time in the
creed of the poet, and which belongs to the character of his favourite
hero. Whether the Odyssey did or did not come from the same hand as the
Iliad, at least Achilles is the same in both. In the former poem we
find him indulging in all the mournful irony of the Hebrew Preacher, in
his perplexed thought before he was led to “the conclusion of the whole
matter”--complaining, like him, that “one event happeneth to all,” and
that “the wise man dieth as the fool;” that he, the bravest and most
beautiful of living heroes, would have to meet the same lot as his
victim Lycaon; so here, in the Odyssey, he adopts the text that “a
living dog is better than a dead lion:”--

   “Rather would I, in the sun’s warmth divine,
    Serve some poor churl who drags his days in grief,
    Than the whole lordship of the dead were mine.”

Such was the immortality to which Paganism condemned even its best and
bravest.

One touching inquiry both Agamemnon and Achilles put to their visitor
from the upper world. How fare their sons? Where is Orestes?--asks the
great king. Did Neoptolemus, in the later days of the war, prove himself
worthy of his father?--inquires Achilles. When he has been assured of
this, the shade of the mighty hero, well satisfied,

    “Passed striding through the fields of asphodel.”

There is no distinct principle of reward or punishment discernible in
the regions of the dead, as seen by Ulysses. Indeed, anything like
happiness in this shadowy future seems incompatible with the feelings
put into the mouth of Achilles. Orion, the mighty hunter, appears to
enjoy something like the Red Indian’s paradise--pursuing, in those
shadowy fields, the phantoms of the wild creatures which he slew on
earth; but, with this exception, there is no hint of pleasurable
interest or occupation for the mighty dead. Punishments there are for
notorious offenders against the majesty of the gods:--

     “There also Tantalus in anguish stood,
      Plunged in the stream of a translucent lake;
      And to his chin welled ever the cold flood.
      But when he rushed, in fierce desire to break
      His torment, not one drop could he partake.
      For as the old man stooping seems to meet
      That water with his fiery lips, and slake
      The frenzy of wild thirst, around his feet,
    Leaving the dark earth dry, the shuddering waves retreat.

     “Also the thick-leaved arches overhead
      Fruit of all savour in profusion flung,
      And in his clasp rich clusters seemed to shed.
      There citrons waved, with shining fruitage hung,
      Pears and pomegranates, olive ever young,
      And the sweet-mellowing fig: but whensoe’er
      The old man, fain to cool his burning tongue,
      Clutched with his fingers at the branches fair,
    Came a strong wind and whirled them skyward through the air.”

     “And I saw Sisyphus in travail strong
      Shove with both hands a mighty sphere of stone:
      With feet and sinewy wrists he, labouring long,
      Just pushed the vast globe up, with many a groan;
      But when he thought the huge mass to have thrown
      Clean o’er the summit, the enormous weight
      Back to the nether plain rolled tumbling down.
      He, straining, the great toil resumed, while sweat
    Bathed each laborious limb, and his brow smoked with heat.”

Both these are examples of punishment inflicted in the Shades below, not
for an evil life, but for personal offences against the sovereign of the
gods. Tantalus had been admitted as a guest to the banquet of the
immortals, and had stolen their nectar and ambrosia to give to his
fellow-men. Sisyphus had been, it is true, a notorious robber on earth,
but the penalty assigned him was for the higher crime of betraying an
amour of Jupiter’s which had come to his knowledge. The stone of
Sisyphus has been commonly taken as an illustration of labour spent in
vain; but a modern English poet has found in it a beautiful illustration
of the indestructibility of hope. In one of Lord Lytton’s ‘Tales of
Miletus,’ when Orpheus visits the Shades in search of his lost wife--

   “He heard, tho’ in the midst of Erebus,
    Song sweet as his Muse-mother made his own;
    It broke forth from a solitary ghost,
            Who, up a vaporous hill,

    “Heaved a huge stone that came rebounding back,
    And still the ghost upheaved it and still sang.
    In the brief pause from toil while towards the height
            Reluctant rolled the stone,

    “The Thracian asked in wonder, ‘Who art thou,
    Voiced like Heaven’s lark amidst the night of Hell?’
    ‘My name on earth was Sisyphus,’ replied
            The phantom. ‘In the Shades

    “I keep mine earthly wit; I have duped the Three.[38]
    They gave me work for torture; work is joy.
    Slaves work in chains, and to the clank they sing.’
            Said Orpheus, ‘Slaves still hope!’

    “‘And could I strain to heave up the huge stone
    Did I not hope that it would reach the height?
    There penance ends, and dawn Elysian fields.’
            ‘But if it never reach?’

    “The Thracian sighed, as looming through the mist
    The stone came whirling back. ‘Fool,’ said the ghost,
    ‘Then mine, at worst, is everlasting hope.’
            Again uprose the stone.”

Ulysses confesses that he did not see all he might have seen; for, when
the pale ghosts in their ten thousands crowded round him with wild
cries, the hero lost courage, fled back to his ship, and bade his
comrades loose their cables, and put out at once to sea.

They passed the island where the twin sisters, the Sirens, lay couched
in flowers, luring all passing mariners to their destruction by the
fascination of their song. Forewarned by Circe, the chief had stopped
the ears of all his crew with melted wax, and had made them bind him to
the mast, giving them strict charge on no account to release him,
however he might entreat or threaten--for he himself, true to his
passion for adventure, would fain listen to these dangerous
enchantresses. So, as they drifted close along the shore, the Sirens
lifted their voices and sang as follows--every word of Mr Worsley’s
translation is Homer’s, except the single phrase in brackets:--

      “Hither, Odysseus, great Achaian name,
      Turn thy swift keel, and listen to our lay;
      Since never pilgrim to these regions came
      In black ship [on the azure waves astray],
      But heard our sweet voice ere he sailed away,
      And in his joy passed on, with ampler mind.
      We know what labours were in ancient day
      Wrought in wide Troia, as the gods assigned;
    We know from land to land all toils of all mankind.”

But the deaf crew rowed on, and not until the sound of the strain had
died away in the distance did they unbind their captain, in spite of his
angry protests. They pass the strait that divides Sicily from
Italy, where on either hand lurked the monsters Scylla and
Charybdis--impersonations, it may be, of rocks and whirlpools--but which
they escaped, with the loss of six out of the crew, by help of Circe’s
warnings and directions. But that our own Spenser’s ‘Faery Queen’ is
perhaps even less known to the majority of English readers than the
Odyssey of Homer (by grace of popular translations), it might be
needless to remind them how the whole of Sir Guyon’s voyage on the “Idle
Lake” is nothing more or less than a reproduction of this portion of
Ulysses’ adventures.[39] The five mermaidens, who entrap unwary
travellers with their melody, address the knight as he floats by in a
strain which is the echo of the Sirens’--

     “O thou fayre son of gentle Fäery,
      That art in mightie arms most magnifyde
      Above all knights that ever batteill tryde,
      O turn thy rudder hitherwarde awhile:
      Here may thy storme-bett vessell safely ryde:
      This is the port of rest from troublous toyle,
    The worldes sweet Inn from pain and wearisome turmoyle.”

The enchantress Acrasia, with her transformed lovers--the “seeming
beasts who are men in deed”--is but a copy from Circe; while the “Gulf
of Greediness” yawning on one side of the Lake--

    “That deep engorgeth all this worldës prey”--

and on the other side the “Rock of Vile Reproach,” whose fatal magnetic
power draws in all who try to shun the whirlpool opposite, are the
Scylla and Charybdis of Homer.

At length the voyagers reached the shore where the oxen of the Sun were
pastured. In vain did Ulysses, remembering the prophecy of Tiresias, bid
them steer on and leave the land unvisited. Eurylochus, his lieutenant,
broke out at last into something like mutiny. He had some show of
reason, when he complained of his chief, almost in the words of Sir
Dinadan to Sir Tristram in the ‘Morte d’Arthur,’ that he was tired of
such mad company, and would no longer follow a man to whose iron frame
the toils and dangers which wore out ordinary mortals were a mere
disport. Seeing that the rest backed Eurylochus in his proposal to land
and rest, Ulysses was fain to give way, after exacting a vow that at
least none of them should lay sacrilegious hands upon the sacred herds,
since they had store of corn and wine, the parting gifts of Circe, on
board their vessel. But stress of weather detained them in the anchorage
a whole month, until corn and wine were exhausted, and they had to snare
birds and catch fish--a kind of food which a Greek seaman especially
despised--to keep them from starving. Then at last, while their chief
had withdrawn to a quiet spot, and fallen asleep wearied with long
prayer, Eurylochus persuaded the rest to break their vow, and slay the
choicest of the oxen. Terrible prodigies followed the unhallowed meal;
the skins of the slain animals moved and crawled after their slayers,
and the meat, while roasting on the spits, uttered fearful cries and
groans. One of the old allegorical interpreters has drawn from this
incident a moral which, however fanciful, is not without a certain
beauty and appositeness of illustration--the sins of the wicked, he
says, dog their steps, and cry aloud against them. When next they put to
sea, Jupiter raised winds and waves to punish them; for the Sun had
threatened that, if such insult went unavenged, he would light the
heavens no more, but go down and shine in Hades. Their ship was riven by
a thunderbolt, and Ulysses alone, sole survivor of all his crew, after
once more narrowly escaping the whirlpool of Charybdis, after floating
nine days upon the broken mast, was cast ashore on the island of
Calypso, and there detained until his release by the intercession of
Minerva, as has been told, which had ended in this second shipwreck on
the coast of his present entertainers.






ULYSSES’ RETURN TO ITHACA.


The hero, at his departure, is loaded with rich presents of honour from
his Phæacian hosts. The twelve princes of the kingdom each contribute
their offering--gold and changes of raiment; the king adds a gold
drinking-cup of his own, and Queen Arete a mantle and tunic. The careful
queen also supplies him with a magnificent chest, in which she packs his
treasures with her own royal hands; and Ulysses secures the whole with a
“seaman’s knot,” whose complications will defy the uninitiated--a secret
which he has learnt from Circe, and which he seems to have handed down
to modern sailors. Thus equipped, he is sent on board one of the magic
galleys, to be conveyed home to his native Ithaca. They embark in the
evening, and early the next morning the crew--apparently in order to
give the adventure the half-ludicrous turn which seems inseparable from
the Phæacians--land their passenger, still sound asleep, and leave him
on shore under an olive-tree, with his store of presents heaped beside
him. When he awakes, he fails to recognise his native island, for
Minerva has spread a mist over it. The goddess herself presently
accosts him, in the form of a shepherd, and listens patiently to a story
which the hero invents, with his usual readiness, to account for his
presence on the island. Then she discovers herself, with a somewhat
ironical compliment on the inveterate craftiness which has led him to
attempt to impose on the wisest of the immortals. She tells him news of
his wife and of his son, and promises him her help against the accursed
suitors. She lays her golden wand upon him, and lo! the majestic
presence which had touched the maiden fancy of Nausicaa, and won him
favour in the eyes of the Phæacian court (to say nothing of Circe and
Calypso) has at once given place to the decrepitude of age. The ruddy
cheeks grow wrinkled, the bright eyes are dimmed, the flowing locks
turned grey, and Ulysses is, to all appearance, an aged beggar, clad in
squalid rags. Thus disguised, so that none shall recognise him till his
hour comes, he seeks shelter, by direction of the goddess, with his own
swineherd Eumæus.

Eumæus is one of the most characteristic personages in the poem, and has
given the most trouble to the poet’s various critics. He occupies a sort
of forester’s lodge in the woods, where the vast herds of swine
belonging to the absent king are fed by day, and carefully lodged at
night. Though he is but a keeper of swine, Homer applies to him
continually the epithets “godlike,” and “chief of men,” which he
commonly uses only of territorial lords such as Ulysses and Menelaus. He
not only has subordinates in his employ, but an attendant slave, whom he
has purchased with his own money; and he so far exercises an
independent right of property in the animals which are under his care as
to kill and dress them--two at a time, such is the lavish hospitality of
the age--to feast the stranger-guest who has now come to him. It may be
straining a point to see in him, as one of the most genial of Homeric
critics does, “a genuine country gentleman of the age of Homer;” but his
position, so far as it is possible to compare it with anything at all in
modern social life, appears something like that of the agricultural
steward of a large landed proprietor, with whom his relations, though
strictly subordinate, are of a highly confidential and friendly
character. The charge of the swine would be a much more important office
in an age when, as is plain from many passages both in the Iliad and the
Odyssey, the flesh of those animals held a place of honour at the
banquets of chiefs and kings: and as we find that even the sons of a
royal household did not think the keeping of sheep beneath their
dignity, so the care of other animals would by no means imply a menial
position. Eumæus, indeed, turns out to be himself of princely
birth--stolen in his childhood by a treacherous nurse from the island
where his father was king, sold by Phœnician merchants to Laertes in
Ithaca, and brought up in his household almost as a son, and regarding
the lost Ulysses “as an elder brother.” Very loyal is he to the house of
his benefactors; prefacing his meal by a prayer that his lord may yet
return in safety, and grieving specially that the lady Penelope, in her
present troubles, has seldom the opportunity to see or speak with him in
the kindly intercourse of old. The cordial and simple relations between
master and servant--even though the servant was commonly nothing more or
less than a purchased slave--are a striking feature, very pleasant to
dwell upon, in these Homeric poems. They remind us, as Homer does so
often, of similar pictures in the sacred narrative of the gentler
affections which redeemed so often the curse of slavery--of the little
captive Israelite maiden whose concern for her Syrian master led to his
cure, and of the faithful steward, “born in the house” of Abraham, whom
the childless patriarch once thought to make his heir.

Eumæus entertains the stranger right hospitably--warning him, at the
same time, not to pretend, as others have often done in the hope of
reward, to bring tidings of the lost Ulysses. His guest’s own story he
will be glad to hear. The hero is always ready at narrative, whether the
tale is to be fact or fiction. At present he chooses fiction; he gives
his listener an imaginary history of his past life, as a Cretan chief
who had seen much good service in many lands, especially under King
Idomeneus at Troy, but who had met with a succession of disasters since.
Of course he had seen and known Ulysses; had heard of him since the fall
of Troy; and he offers his host a wager that he will yet return. Eumæus
will hear nothing of such flattering hopes; by this time his men are
coming in from the field, and when the swine are safely housed, supper
and bedtime follow. But the night is bitter cold, and Ulysses has
nothing but his beggar’s rags. He indirectly begs a covering from his
host by an ingenious story, very characteristic of the style of the
lighter episodes of the Odyssey. He relates an adventure of his own
while lying in ambush, one winter night, under the walls of Troy. Dr
Maginn’s translation of this passage, in the old English ballad style,
though somewhat free, preserves fairly the spirit and humour of the
original:--

    “Oh! were I as young and as fresh and as strong
     As when under Troy, brother soldiers among,
     In ambush as captains were chosen to lie
     Odysseus and King Menelaus and I!

    “They called me as third, and I came at the word,
     And reached the high walls that the citadel gird;
     When under the town we in armour lay down
     By a brake in the marshes with weeds overgrown.
     The night came on sharp, bleak the north wind did blow,
     And frostily cold fell a thick shower of snow.

    “Soon with icicles hoar every shield was frozen o’er;
     But they who their cloaks and their body-clothes wore
     The night lightly passed, secure from the blast,
     Asleep with their shields o’er their broad shoulders cast;
     But I, like a fool, had my cloak left behind,
     Not expecting to shake in so piercing a wind.

    “My buckler and zone--nothing more--had I on;
     But when the third part of the night-watch was gone,
     And the stars left the sky, with my elbow then I
     Touched Odysseus, and spoke to him, lying close by--
     Noble son of Laertes, Odysseus the wise,
     I fear that alive I shall never arise.

    “‘In this night so severe but one doublet I wear--
     Deceived by a god--and my cloak is not here,
     And no way I see from destruction to flee.’
     But soon to relieve me a project had he.
     In combat or council still prompt was his head,
     And into my ear thus low whisp’ring he said:--

    “‘Let none of the band this your need understand;
     Keep silent.’ Then, resting his head on his hand,--
     ‘Friends and comrades of mine,’ he exclaimed, ‘as a sign,
     While I slept has come o’er me a dream all divine.
     It has warned me how far from the vessels we lie,
     And that some one should go for fresh force to apply;

    “‘And his footsteps should lead, disclosing our need,
     To King Agamemnon, our chieftain, with speed.’
     Thoas rose as he spoke, flung off his red cloak,
     And running, his way with the message he took;
     While, wrapt in his garment, I pleasantly lay
     Till the rise of the golden-throned queen of the day.

    “‘If I now were as young, and as fresh, and as strong,
     Perhaps here in the stables you swine-herds among
     Some a mantle would lend, as the act of a friend,
     Or from the respect that on worth should attend;
     But small is the honour, I find, that is paid
     To one who, like me, is so meanly arrayed.’”
             --(Maginn’s ‘Homeric Ballads.’)

The self-laudation which the hero, speaking in another person, takes the
opportunity to introduce, is in perfect keeping with his character
throughout.

The hint so broadly given is quite successful, and Eumæus provides his
guest with some warm coverings and a place near the fire; but he himself
will not sleep so far from his charge. Wrapped in a mighty wind-proof
cloak, he takes up his quarters for the night under the shelter of a
rock, hard by the lair of his swine.






THE RETURN OF TELEMACHUS FROM SPARTA.


The story returns to Telemachus, whom we left at Sparta. His stay at
that court has been prolonged a whole month, for which the excuse, we
must suppose, is to be found in the hospitalities of Menelaus and the
fascinations of Helen. No wonder that his guardian goddess admonishes
him in a dream that, under his present circumstances, such delays are
dangerous. Penelope has a hard time of it in his absence, even her
father pressing her to marry some one of her suitors. Nay, Minerva more
than hints--though we beg our readers not to accept such an insinuation
against Penelope, even on the authority of a goddess--that Eurymachus,
one of the richest of the rivals, is beginning to find favour in her
eyes. Telemachus is roused once more to action: awakening his young
friend Pisistratus, he proposes that they should set out on their return
at once--before the day breaks. The son of the old “Horse-tamer”
sensibly reminds him that driving in the dark is very undesirable, and
it is agreed to wait for the morning. Menelaus, with genuine courtesy,
refrains from any attempt to detain his guests longer than seems
agreeable to themselves. A portion of his speech, as rendered by Pope,
has passed into a popular maxim as to the true limits of hospitality,
and has been quoted, no doubt, by many, with very little idea that they
were indebted to Homer for the precept--

   “True friendship’s laws are by this rule exprest--
    Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.”

Another maxim of the hospitable Spartan has long been adopted by
Englishmen--that all wise men, who have a long day’s journey before
them, should lay in a substantial breakfast. This the travellers do, and
then prepare to mount their chariot; Telemachus bearing with him, as the
parting gift of his royal host, a bowl of silver wondrously chased, “the
work of Vulcan”--too fair to come from any mortal hand--which Menelaus
had himself received from the King of Sidon; while Helen adds an
embroidered robe “that glistened like a star,” one of many which she has
woven with her own hands, which she begs him to keep to adorn his bride
on her marriage-day. Even as they part, lo! there is an omen in the
sky--an eagle bearing off a white goose in her talons. Who shall expound
it? Menelaus, who is appealed to, is no soothsayer. Helen alone can
unlock the riddle:--

   “Just as this eagle came from far away,
    Reared in the bleak rock, nursling of the hill,
    And in the stormy ravin of his wild will
    Seized on the white goose, delicately bred,--
    So brave Ulysses, after countless ill,
    Comes from afar off, dealing vengeance dread.”

Telemachus blesses her for the happy interpretation, and promises that,
should the word come true, he will worship the fair prophetess in Ithaca
as nothing less than a divinity. Whether or no he made good his vow the
poet does not tell us. Worse mortals have been canonised both in ancient
and modern calendars. And whether Helen was honoured thus in Ithaca or
not, she certainly was at Sparta, where we are told that she displayed
her new powers as a divinity once at least in a very appropriate
manner--transforming a child of remarkable ugliness, at the prayer of
its nurse, into a no less remarkable beauty.

The young men make their first evening halt at Pheræ, as before, and
reach Nestor’s court at Pylos next day. Telemachus insists on driving
straight to the bay where his patient crew still await him with the
galley--for he knows old Nestor will try to detain him, out of kindness,
if he once set foot again in the palace--and instantly on his arrival
they hoist sail for home. They round the peninsula in the night, and
with the morning’s dawn they sight the spiry peaks of Ithaca. The crew
moor the vessel in a sheltered bay, while Telemachus--to escape the
ambuscade which he knows to have been laid for him--makes straight for
the swineherd’s lodge, instead of entering the town. As he draws near
the threshold, the watch-dogs know his step, and run out to greet him;
Eumæus himself, in his delight at the meeting, drops from his hands the
bowl of wine which he was carefully mixing as a morning draught for his
disguised guest, and falls on his young lord’s neck, kissing him, and
weeping tears of joy.

      “Thou, O Telemachus, my life, my light,
      Returnest; yet my soul did often say
      That never, never more should I have sight
      Of thy sweet face, since thou didst sail away.
      Enter, dear child, and let my heart allay
      Its yearnings; newly art thou come from far:
      Thou comest all too seldom--fain to stay
      In the thronged city, where the suitors are,
    Silently looking on while foes thy substance mar.”

Ulysses preserves his disguise, and rises from his seat to offer it to
the young chief. But Telemachus, like all Homer’s heroes, is
emphatically a gentleman; and he will not take an old man’s place,
though that man be but a poor wayfarer clad in rags. When he has broken
his fast at his retainer’s table, he would know from him who the
stranger is. Eumæus repeats the fictitious history which he has heard
from Ulysses, and Telemachus promises the shipwrecked wanderer relief
and protection. He sends Eumæus to announce his own safe return to
Penelope; and when the father and son are left alone, suddenly Minerva
appears--visible only to Ulysses and to the dogs, who cower and whine at
the supernatural presence--and bids him discover himself to his son. The
beggar’s rags fall off, a royal robe takes their place, and he resumes
all the majesty of presence which he had worn before. But Telemachus
does not recognise the father whom he has never known; the sudden
transformation rather suggests to him some heavenly visitant. He was but
an infant when Ulysses went to Troy; and even when his father assures
him of his identity, he will not believe. There is a quiet sadness, but
no reproach, in the hero’s reply:--

   “Other Odysseus cometh none save me.
    Behold me as I am! By earth and sea
    Scourged with affliction, in the twentieth year,
    Safe to mine own land at the last I flee.”

It is long before either, in their first emotion, can find words to tell
their story. Ulysses takes his son fully into his counsels, and charges
him to keep the news of his return as yet a secret even from his mother,
until they two shall discover who among the household can be trusted to
aid them in the extermination of the intruders and their powerful
retinue. He knows that his day of vengeance is come at last, and nothing
less than this will satisfy him. Telemachus has some timorous
misgivings, according to his nature--What are they two against so many?
But Ulysses knows that the gods are on his side--Minerva and the Father
of the gods himself; or shall we say with the allegorists, in this case,
the Counsels of Heaven and the Justice of Heaven? There is a grand irony
in the question which he puts to his son--“Thinkest thou these allies
will suffice, or shall we seek for other helpers?”






ULYSSES REVISITS HIS PALACE.


Great is the consternation amongst the riotous crew in the palace, when
they find that Telemachus has escaped their toils, and has returned; and
great the joy of Penelope when she hears this good news from Eumæus,
which yet she hardly believes, until it is confirmed by a visit from her
son in person. The suitors receive him with feigned courtesy, though
some among them have already determined on his assassination. The
swineherd follows to the palace, bringing with him, by command of
Telemachus, the seeming beggar--for Ulysses has undergone a second
transformation, and is once more an aged man in mean apparel. As a poor
wanderer, dependent on public charity, he is sure to find that ready
admittance into the royal precincts which is so necessary for carrying
out his plans of vengeance, without raising the suspicions of the
present occupants. On the way they are met by Melanthius the goatherd,
whose character stands in marked contrast to that of Eumæus. He is
utterly faithless to his absent master’s interests, and has become the
ready instrument of his enemies. With mocking insolence he jeers at
Eumæus and his humble acquaintance, and even goes so far as to spurn the
latter with his foot. Ulysses fully justifies his character for patience
and endurance; though for a moment he does debate in his heart the
alternative, whether he should break the skull of the scoffer with his
club, or lift him from his feet and dash his brains out on the ground.
As he draws near the gates of his own palace he espies another old
retainer, of a different type, belonging to a race noted in all lands
and ages for its fidelity. There lies on the dunghill, dying of old age,
disease, and neglect, his dog Argus--the companion of many a long chase
in happier days. The dog has all Eumæus’s loyalty, and more than his
discernment. His instinct at once detects his old master, even through
the disguise lent by the goddess of wisdom. Before he sees him, he knows
his voice and step, and raises his ears--

   “And when he marked Odysseus in the way,
    And could no longer to his lord come near,
    Fawned with his tail, and drooped in feeble play
    His ears. Odysseus turning wiped a tear.”

Eustathius (who made none the worse archbishop because he was a thorough
lover of Homer) has remarked, somewhat pertinently, that the fate of his
dog draws from the imperturbable Ulysses the tears which he never sheds
for any thought of Penelope. But such lesser pathetic incidents have
often, in actual life, a stronger emotional effect than is produced by
the deeper affections.[40] But he masters his emotion, for this is no
time to betray himself, and follows Eumæus through the entrance-doors.
It is poor Argus’s last effort, and the old hound turns and dies--

    “Just having seen Odysseus in the twentieth year.”

The story is told by the Greek poet with somewhat more prolixity of
detail than suits our modern notions of the pathetic, but the pathos of
the incident itself is of the simplest and purest kind.

In beggar’s guise Ulysses enters his own hall, and makes his rounds of
the party who sit there at table, soliciting some contribution of broken
meat to his wallet. None is so hard of heart as to refuse, except
Antinous. In vain does Ulysses compliment him on his princely beauty,
and remind him of the uncertainty of fortune, as evidenced by his own
present case:--

      “Once to me also sorrow came not near,
      And I had riches and a noble name,
    And to the wandering poor still gave, whoever came.”

      “Legions of slaves and many thousand things
      I held, which God doth on the great bestow--
      All that the ownership of large wealth brings.
      But Zeus the Thunderer, for he willed it so,
      Emptied my power, and sent a wave of woe.”

Antinous haughtily bids him stand off, and when Ulysses expresses his
wonder that in so fair a body should dwell so mean a spirit, hurls a
stool at him. The blow does not shake the strong frame of Ulysses, who
moves to the doorway, lays down his wallet, and lifts his voice in
solemn imprecation to the Powers on high who protect the stranger and
the poor:--

      “Hear me, ye suitors of the queen divine!
      Men grieve not for the wounds they take in fight,
      Defending their own wealth, white sheep or kine;
      But me (bear witness!) doth Antinous smite
      Only because I suffer hunger’s bite,
      Fount to mankind of evils evermore.
      Now may Antinous, ere his nuptial night,
      If there be gods and furies of the poor,
    Die unavenged, unwept, upon the palace-floor.”

Even some amongst the young man’s companions are horrified by this
reckless violation of the recognised laws of charity and hospitality.
One of them speaks out in strong rebuke:--

      “Not to thine honour hast thou now let fall,
      Antinous, on the wandering poor this blow.
      Haply a god from heaven is in our hall,
      And thou art ripe for ruin: I bid thee know,
      Gods in the garb of strangers to and fro
      Wander the cities, and men’s ways discern;
      Yea, through the wide earth in all shapes they go,
      Changed, yet the same, and with their own eyes learn
    How live the sacred laws--who hold them, and who spurn.”

This is one of those noble passages in which the creed of the poet soars
far above his mythology. The god who is the avenger of broken oaths, and
the protector of the poor and the stranger, though he bears the name of
Zeus or Jupiter, is a power of very different type from the Ruler of
Olympus, who indulges his sensual passions in base amours with
mortals,--who in the Iliad is perpetually engaged in domestic wrangles
with his queen, and even in the Odyssey wreaks a weak vengeance on
Ulysses merely to gratify the spite of Neptune.

      “Meanwhile Telemachus sat far apart,
      Feeding on fire; and deeper and more drear
      Grew the sharp pang, that he saw stricken there
      His own dear father, and the flower of kings.
      Yet from his eyelids he let fall no tear,
      But, filled in soul with dark imaginings,
    Silently waved his head, and brooded evil things.”

Additional insults await the hero in his own hall. There comes from the
town a sturdy beggar, known as Irus--“the messenger”--by a kind of
parody on the name of the rainbow goddess, Iris, who performs the same
office for the immortals. Jealous of a rival mendicant, such as Ulysses
appears, he threatens to drive him from the hall. Ulysses quietly warns
him to keep his hands off--there is room enough for both. The young
nobles shout with delight at a quarrel which promises such good sport,
and at once form a ring for the combatants, and undertake to see fair
play. When the disguised king strips off his squalid rags for the
boxing-match, and discovers the brawny chest and shoulders for which he
was remarkable, Irus trembles at the thought of encountering him. But it
is too late: with a single blow Ulysses breaks his jaw, and drags him
out into the courtyard. The revellers now hail the conqueror with loud
applause, and award him the prize of victory--a goat-paunch filled with
mince-meat and blood, the prototype, apparently, both of the Scotch
haggis and the English black-pudding. Amphinomus--who has already shown
something of a nobler nature than the rest--adds a few words of generous
sympathy: he sees in the wandering mendicant one who has known better
days, and pledges him in a cup of wine, with a hope that brighter
fortunes are yet in store. Ulysses is touched with pity for the fate
which the young man’s evil companions are inevitably drawing on him. He
had heard, he tells him, of his father, Nisus--had known him, doubtless,
in fact--a wise and good man; such ought the son to be. He adds a voice
of ominous warning, tinged with that saddened view of man at his best
estate which continually breaks forth, even amidst the lighter passages
of the poet.

   “Earth than a man no poorer feebler thing
    Rears, of all creatures that here breathe or move;
    Who, while the gods lend health, and his knees string,
    Boasts that no sorrow he is born to prove.
    But when the gods assail him from above,
    Then doth he bear it with a bitter mind,
    Dies without help, or liveth against love.”

Penelope now descends from her chamber for a moment into the hall, to
have speech with her son. The goddess Minerva has shed on her such
radiant grace and beauty, that her appearance draws forth passionate
admiration from Eurymachus. She does but taunt him in reply: most
suitors, she says, at least bring presents in their hand; these of hers
do but rob, where others give freely. They are all stung sufficiently
by her words to produce at once from their stores some costly
offerings--embroidered robes, chains and brooches and necklaces of gold
and electrum. The queen, after the practical fashion of the age, is not
too disdainful to carry them off to her chamber; while Ulysses--as
indeed seems more in accordance with his character--secretly rejoices to
see his wife thus “spoiling the Egyptians.” Some commentators have
apologised for this seeming meanness on the part of Penelope by the
explanation, that she does it to inspire them with false hopes of her
choosing one of them now at last for her husband, and so lulling them
into a false security in order to insure their easier destruction. But
it is best to take the moral tone of these early poems honestly, as we
find it, and not attempt to force it into too close agreement with our
own.

After some further acts of insult, still borne with a wrathful endurance
by Ulysses, the company quit the hall, as usual, for the night. Then
Penelope descends again from her chamber, and sitting by the hearth,
bids a chair be set also for the wandering stranger: she will hear his
tale. He represents himself to her as the brother of King Idomeneus of
Crete, and as having once in his brother’s absence entertained the great
Ulysses in his halls. To Penelope’s eager questions, by which she seeks
to test his veracity, he answers by describing not so much the person of
her husband as his distinctive dress. The queen recognises, in this
description, the curiously-embroidered mantle which she had worked for
him, and the golden clasp, “linked with twin stars,” which she had
fastened with her own hands when he parted from her to go to Troy. She
breaks into floods of tears at the recollection; while the disguised
Ulysses sets his eyes hard, “as though they were of horn or steel,” and
checks his rising tears. He comforts her with the assurance that he
brings recent news of her hero--of his shipwreck and visit to the
Phæacians; that he is even now on his way to Ithaca, last heard of in
the neighbouring island of Dulichium, within easy reach of home; nay,
this very year, he would be content to pledge himself, Ulysses shall
stand once more in his own halls. Incredulous, yet thankful for the
comfort, the queen orders the wanderer to be taken to the bath, and
entertained as an honoured guest. But he refuses all attendance save
that of the aged Eurycleia. She marks with wonder his likeness to her
absent master; but such resemblance, he assures her, has been noticed
frequently by others. As she bathes his feet, her eyes fall on a
well-remembered scar, left by a wound received from a boar’s tusk in his
youth while hunting on Mount Parnassus with his grandsire
Autolycus.[41] The old nurse doubts no longer. She lets the foot fall
heavily, and upsets the bath.

   “Surely thou art Ulysses--yes, thou art--
    My darling child, and I not knew my king
    Till I had handled thee in every part!”

He puts his hand upon her throat, and forcibly checks her outcry; his
purpose is not to be known openly as yet, for he feels there are few,
even of his own household, whom he can trust. He charges her--even on
pain of death, much as he loves her--to keep his secret; then, refusing
all softer accommodation, he lies down in the vestibule on a couch of
bullhide, not sleeping, but nursing his wrath in a fever of
wakefulness.






THE DAY OF RETRIBUTION.


The morrow is a festival of Apollo. It is kept by the riotous crew in
the halls of Ulysses with more than their usual revelry. The disguised
hero himself, feeding at a small table apart by command of Telemachus,
is still subject to their insults. But portents are not wanting of their
impending doom. In the midst of the feast Minerva casts them into fits
of ghastly laughter; the meat which they are eating drips with gore; and
the seer Theoclymenus--a refugee under the protection of Telemachus--who
has been of late their unwilling companion, sees each man’s head
enveloped in a misty darkness, and the whole court and vestibule
thronged with ghostly shapes. He cries out in affright, and tells them
what sight he sees; but they only answer him with mockery, and threaten
to drive him forth as one who has lost his wits. After warning them of
the fate which he foresees awaiting them, he quits the company. They
turn upon Telemachus, and taunt him with his sorry choice of guests:
first yon lazy disreputable vagabond, and now this prating would-be
soothsayer. The young man makes no reply, but watches his father
anxiously; and Ulysses still bides his time.

The queen meanwhile has bethought her of a new device, to put off yet
awhile the evil day in which she must at length make her choice amongst
her importunate lovers. She unlocks an inner chamber where the treasures
of the house are stored, and draws from its case Ulysses’ bow, the gift
of his dead friend Iphitus, which he had not taken with him to Troy.
Before she carries it down, she lays it fondly on her knees, and weeps
as she thinks of its absent master. One cunning feat she remembers which
her hero was wont to perform--to drive an arrow straight through the
hollow rings of twelve axe-heads set up in a line. Whichsoever of her
suitors can bend the strong bow, and send a shaft right through the
whole row of twelve, like the lost Ulysses, that man she will follow,
however reluctantly, as her future lord. She has more than a lingering
hope, we may be sure, that one and all will fail in a trial so
manifestly difficult. They would refuse the ordeal, but for Antinous.
Confident in his own powers, he hopes to succeed--he knows the rest will
fail. They, out of shame, accept the test. Telemachus himself fixes the
weapons firmly in the earth in a true and even line, a task in itself of
no small difficulty, but which he performs with such skill as to win the
admiration of the whole party. He claims the right to make trial first
himself, in the hope to prove himself his father’s true son. Thrice he
draws the bow-string, but not yet to its right extent. As he is making a
fourth attempt, sanguine of success, he meets a look from his father
which checks his hand. Ulysses foresees that should his son succeed
where the others fail, and so claim what they are really seeking, the
royal power of Ithaca, the whole band might suddenly unite against him,
and so frustrate his present scheme of vengeance. Reluctantly, at his
father’s sign, the youth lays down the bow, and professes to lament the
weakness of his degenerate hand. One after another the rival princes in
turn strive to bend it, but in vain; even Antinous and Eurymachus,
notably the best among them, fail to move the string, though the bow is
warmed by the fire and rubbed well with melted fat to make it more
pliable. Antinous finds plausible excuse for the failure--they have
profaned the festival of Apollo by this contest; it shall be renewed
under better auspices on the morrow. Then the seeming beggar (who
meanwhile has made himself known as their true lord to Eumæus and
another faithful retainer, the herdsman Philœtius) makes request that he
may try his hand upon this wondrous bow. Loud and coarse is the abuse
which Antinous and his fellows shower upon him for his audacity; but
Telemachus exerts the authority in his mother’s house which his
uninvited guests seem never quite to make up their minds to dispute when
it is firmly claimed, and the weapon is given into the hands of its true
owner. He handles it gently and lovingly, turning it over and over to
see whether it has in any way suffered by time or decay, and brings
notes from the tight-strained bow-string, “shrill and sweet as the voice
of the swallow.” At last he fits an arrow to the notch, and, not
deigning even to rise from his seat to make the effort, draws it to its
full stretch, and sends the shaft right through the whole line of
axe-heads. It is the immediate prelude to the bloody tragedy which
follows--

                        “‘Behold, the mark is hit,
      Hit without labour! the old strength cleaves fast
      Upon me, and my bones are stourly knit--
    Not as the suitors mock me in their scornful wit.

      “‘Now is it time their evening meal to set
      Before the Achaians, ere the sun go down.
      And other entertainment shall come yet,
      Dance and the song, which are the banquet’s crown.’
      He spake, and with his eyebrows curved the frown.
      Seizing his sword and spear Telemachus came,
      Son of Odysseus, chief of high renown,
      And, helmeted with brass like fiery flame,
    Stood by his father’s throne and waited the dire aim.

      “Stript of his rags then leapt the godlike king
      On the great threshold, in his hand the bow
      And quiver, filled with arrows of mortal sting.
      These with a rattle he rained down below,
      Loose at his feet, and spake among them so:
      ‘See, at the last our matchless bout is o’er!
      Now for another mark, that I may know
      If I can hit what none hath hit before,
    And if Apollo hear me in the prayer I pour!’”

The philosopher Plato, who did not spare the poet occasionally, in his
criticisms, speaks of this passage as worthy of all admiration. We have
here the primitive type, since worked out into countless shapes, of the
“situations” and “discoveries” which abound in modern romance and drama.

Ulysses aims the first arrow at Antinous. It pierces him in the throat
as he is raising a goblet to his lips, and he falls backward in the
agonies of death, spilling the untasted wine upon the floor; thus giving
occasion (so says Greek tradition) to that which has now become a common
English proverb--“There’s many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip.”[42]
His comrades stand aghast for a moment, not certain whether the shot be
deliberate or merely accidental. Ulysses sets them at rest on that point
by declaring himself and his purpose. They look round the hall for the
arms which usually hang upon the walls, but these have been secretly
removed during the previous night by Ulysses and his son. Eurymachus,
who has more plausible rhetoric at his command than the others, now
endeavours to make terms. Antinous, he confesses, has well deserved his
fate--he had plotted against the life of Telemachus; but for himself and
the rest, now that the king has come to his own again, they will submit
themselves, and pay such fine as shall amply satisfy him for the
despoiling of his goods. Ulysses scornfully rejects all such compromise.
Then, at Eurymachus’ call, the boldest of the party draw their knives
and make a rush upon him. But a second arrow from the terrible bow
strikes Eurymachus through the breast before he reaches him; Amphinomus
falls by the spear of Telemachus as soon as he gets within range; and
while the father, backed by his two retainers, holds the rest at
bay--rather, we must suppose, by the terror of his presence than the
actual use of his bow--the son rushes off to find arms for the little
party. Ulysses plies his arrows till they are exhausted, and then the
four together continue the unequal combat with the spears now brought
by Telemachus. The details of the work of retribution, like some of the
long slaughter-lists in the Iliad, sufficiently interesting to an
audience for whom war was the great game of human life, are scarcely so
to modern and more fastidious readers. The hero, like all heroes of
romance, performs deeds which in a mere prosaic view would appear
impossibilities. Suffice it to say, that with the Goddess of Wisdom as
an ally (who appears once more under the form of Mentor), the combat
ends in the slaughter of the whole band of intruders, even though they
are partially supplied with arms by the treacherous goatherd, who brings
them from the armoury which Telemachus has carelessly left open. A graze
upon the wrist of Telemachus, and a slight flesh-wound where the spear
of one of the enemy “wrote on the shoulder” of the good swineherd
Eumæus, are the only hurts received by their party in the combat. The
vengeance of the hero is implacable; otherwise it were not heroic, in
the Homeric sense. Not content with the utter extermination of the men
who have usurped his palace, harassed his wife, and insulted his son, he
hangs up also their guilty paramours among the women-servants, who have
joined them in defiling his household gods; first, however, making them
swill and scour clean the blood-stained hall which has been the scene of
the slaughter. The traitorous goatherd Melanthius is by the same stern
orders miserably lopped of ears, and nose, and limbs, before death
releases him. We find the same pitiless cruelty towards his enemies in
the hero of the Odyssey as in the hero of the Iliad. Yet the poet would
teach us that the vengeance of Ulysses is but the instrument of the
divine justice. Like Moses or Joshua, he is but the passionless executor
of the wrath of heaven; while, still to continue the parallel, the
merciless character of the retribution takes its colour from the
ferocity of the age. When the aged Eurycleia, who as yet alone of the
women of the household knows the secret of his return, comes down and
sees the floor strewn with the bloody corpses, she is about to raise a
shout of triumph. But the king checks her:--

   “Nurse, with a mute heart this my vengeance hail!
    Not holy is it o’er the slain to boast.
    These Heaven and their own crimes have brought to bale;
    Since of all strangers, from earth’s every coast,
    No man was honoured of this godless host,
    Nor good nor evil, whosoe’er they knew--
    And with their souls they pay the fatal cost.”






THE RECOGNITION BY PENELOPE.


Penelope, far off in her chamber, has not heard the tumult, for the
doors between the men’s and women’s apartments had been carefully locked
by Eumæus, by his lord’s order. Even when the nurse rushes up to her
with the tidings that Ulysses himself has returned, and made this
terrible lustration of his household, she yet remains incredulous. The
riotous crew may have met their deserved fate, but the hand that has
slain them must be that of some deity, not of Ulysses. Yet she will go
down and look upon the corpses. There, leaning “by a pillar” in the
royal place--like King Joash at his coronation, or King Josiah when he
sware to the covenant--she beholds Ulysses. But he is still in his
beggar’s weed, and after twenty years of absence she is slow to
recognise him. Both Eurycleia and Telemachus break into anger at her
incredulity. The king himself is outwardly as little moved as ever. He
will give tokens of his identity hereafter. For the present there are
precautions to be taken. The slaughter of so many nobles of Ithaca will
scarce be taken lightly when it is heard in the island; it must not be
known abroad until he can try the temper of his subjects, and gather a
loyal host around him. All traces of the bloody scene which has just
been enacted must be carefully concealed; the house must ring with harp,
and song, and dance, that all who hear may think the queen has made her
choice at last, and is holding her wedding-feast to-day--as, in truth,
in a better sense she shall. Ulysses himself goes to the bath to wash
away the stains of slaughter. Thence he comes forth endued once more by
his guardian goddess with the “hyacinthine” locks and the grand presence
which he had worn in the court of Phæacia. He appeals now to his wife’s
memory, for she yet gives no sure sign of recognition:--

   “Lady, the gods that in Olympus dwell
    Have, beyond mortal women, given to thee
    Heart as of flint, which none can soften well.
    Lives not a wife who could endure, save thee,
    Her lord to slight, who, roaming earth and sea,
    Comes to his own land in the twentieth year.
    Haste, Eurycleia, and go spread for me
    Some couch, that I may sleep--but not with her.”

Penelope does recognise the form and features--it is indeed, to all
outward appearance, the Ulysses from whom she parted in tears twenty
years ago. But such appearances are deceitful; gods have been known, ere
now, to put on the form of men to gain the love of mortals. She will put
him to one certain test she wots of. “Give him his own bed,” she says to
the nurse; “go, bring it forth from what was our bridal chamber.” But
the couch of which she speaks is, as she and he both well know,
immovable. Its peculiar structure, as detailed in Homer’s verse, is by
no means easy to unravel. But it is formed in some cunning fashion out
of the stem of an olive-tree, rooted and growing, round which the hero
himself had built a bridal chamber. Move it?--“There lives no mortal,”
exclaims Ulysses, “who could stir it from its place.” Then, at last, all
Penelope’s long doubts are solved in happy certainty:--

     “Then from her eyelids the quick tears did start,
      And she ran to him from her place, and threw
      Her arms about his neck, and a warm dew
      Of kisses poured upon him, and thus spake:
      ‘Frown not, Odysseus; thou art wise and true!
      But God gave sorrow, and hath grudged to make
    Our path to old age sweet, nor willed us to partake

     “‘Youth’s joys together. Yet forgive me this,
      Nor hate me that when first I saw thy brow
      I fell not on thy neck, and gave no kiss,
      Nor wept in thy dear arms as I weep now.
      For in my breast a bitter fear did bow
      My soul, and I lived shuddering day by day,
      Lest a strange man come hither, and avow
      False things, and steal my spirit, and bewray
    My love; such guile men scheme, to lead the pure astray.

           *       *       *       *       *

     “‘But now, since clearly thou unfoldest this,
      The secret of our couch, which none hath read,
      Save only thee and me and Actoris,
      Whom my sire gave me, when I first was wed,
      To guard the chamber of our bridal bed--
       Now I believe against my own belief.’
      She ending a desire of weeping bred
      Within him, and in tears the noble chief
    Clasped his true wife, exulting in their glorious grief.

     “Sweet as to swimmers the dry land appears,
      Whose bark Poseidon in the angry sea
      Strikes with a tempest, and in pieces tears,
      And a few swimmers from the white deep flee,
      Crested with salt foam, and with tremulous knee
      Spring to the shore exulting; even so
      Sweet was her husband to Penelope,
      Nor from his neck could she at all let go
    Her white arms, nor forbid her thickening tears to flow.”

When they retire to rest, each has a long tale to tell. The personal
adventures of Ulysses alone (however careful he might have been to
abridge them in some particulars for his present auditor) would have
made up many an Arabian Night’s entertainment. There would surely have
been little time left for Penelope’s story, but that Minerva’s agency
lengthens the ordinary night--

   “Nor from the rolling river of Ocean’s stream
    Suffered the golden-thronèd Dawn to beam,
    Or yoke the horses that bear light to men.”

Here, according to our modern notions of completeness, the Odyssey
should surely end. Accordingly some critics have surmised that the
twenty-fourth and last book is not Homer’s, but a later addition. But we
may very well suppose that the primitive taste for narrative in the
poet’s day was more simple and childlike; that an ancient Greek audience
would inquire, as our own children would, into all the details of the
sequel, and not be satisfied even with the comprehensive assertion that
“they lived happy ever afterwards.” We have therefore, in the text as it
has come down to us, a kind of supplement to the tale, which, as is the
case with the later scenes in some of Shakespeare’s tragedies, rather
weakens the force of the real catastrophe. An episode at the beginning
of this last book shows us again the regions of the dead, to which the
god Mercury is conducting the spirits of the dead suitors--pale ghosts
who follow him, gibbering and cowering with fear, into that “sunless
land.” The main purpose of the poet seems to be the opportunity once
more of introducing the shades of the great heroes, Achilles and
Agamemnon; the latter contrasting his own miserable and dishonoured end
with that of Achilles, blest above all mortals, dying in battle with all
the flower of Ilium and Greece around him, and leaving a name which is a
sound of glory over the whole earth. So also does he contrast, to
Penelope’s honour, her fidelity with the treachery of his own queen
Clytemnestra; giving voice to a prophecy which has been fulfilled almost
beyond even a poet’s aspirations:--

   “O to her first one love how true was she!
    Nought shall make dim the flower of her sweet fame
    For ever, but the gods unceasingly
    Shall to the earth’s inhabitants her name,
    Wide on the wings of song, with endless praise proclaim.”

Ulysses himself has yet to visit and make himself known to his aged
father Laertes, who is still alive, but living in sad retirement on his
island-farm, solacing himself as well as he may with pruning and tending
his orchard-grounds. The recognition scene, in which the scar left by
the boar’s tusk is once more the touchstone, will seem tedious, as
savouring too much of repetition, to most readers of our day. But there
is one point which has a special and simple beauty of its own. When
Laertes seems yet incredulous as to his son’s identity, Ulysses reminds
him how, when he was yet a child, following his father about the
orchards, and begging with a child’s pertinacity, he had given him “for
his very own” a certain number of apple, fig, and pear trees and
vines--all which he can still remember and enumerate. The token is
irresistible, and the old man all but faints for joy.

An attempt at rebellion on the part of some of his Ithacan subjects, who
are enraged at his slaughter of their nobles, and which is headed by the
father of the dead Antinous, fails to revive the fading interest of the
tale. The ringleader falls by a spear cast by the trembling hand of
Laertes, and the malcontents submit, after a brief contest, to their
lawful chief.

A hint of future travel for the hero leaves his history in some degree
still incomplete. A penance had been imposed upon him by the seer
Tiresias, by which alone he could appease Neptune for the cruel injury
inflicted on his son, the giant Polyphemus. He must seek out some people
who had never seen the sea, and never eaten salt, and there offer
sacrifice to the god. Then, and only then, he might hope to reign for
the rest of his life in peace amongst his islanders. Of the fulfilment
of this pilgrimage the poet tells us nothing. Other legends represent
Ulysses as meeting his death at last from the hand of his own son
Telegonus (born of his amour with Circe), who had landed in the island
of Ithaca on a piratical enterprise. We may remark the coincidence--or
the imitation--in the later legend of the British Arthur, who is slain
in battle by his illegitimate son Mordred. The veil which even tradition
leaves hanging over the great wanderer’s fate is no inappropriate
conclusion to his story. A life of inaction, even in his old age, seems
hardly suited to the poetical conception of this hero of unrest. In the
fragmentary legends of the Middle Ages there is almost material for a
second Odyssey. There, the Greek voyager becomes the pioneer of Atlantic
discoverers--sailing still on into the unknown West in search of the
Earthly Paradise, founding new cities as he goes, and at last meeting
his death in Atlantic waters. The Italian poets--Tasso, Pulci, and
especially Dante--adopted the tradition. In the ‘Inferno’ of the latter,
the spirit of Ulysses thus discloses the last scenes of his career:--

   “Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence
    Of my old father, nor return of love,
    That should have crowned Penelope with joy,
    Could overcome in me the zeal I had
    To explore the world, and search the ways of life,
    Man’s evil and his virtue. Forth I sailed
    Into the deep illimitable main,
    With but one bark, and the small faithful band
    That yet cleaved to me. As Iberia far,
    Far as Marocco, either shore I saw,
    And the Sardinian and each isle beside
    Which round that ocean bathes. Tardy with age
    Were I and my companions, when we came
    To the strait pass, where Hercules ordained
    The boundaries not to be o’erstepped by man.[43]
    The walls of Seville to my right I left,
    On the other hand already Ceuta past.
    ‘O brothers!’ I began, ‘who to the west
    Through perils without number now have reached;
    To this the short remaining watch, that yet
    Our senses have to wake, refuse not proof
    Of the unpeopled world, following the track
    Of Phœbus. Call to mind from whence ye sprang:
    Ye were not formed to live the life of brutes,
    But virtue to pursue and knowledge high.’
    With these few words I sharpened for the voyage
    The mind of my associates, that I then
    Could scarcely have withheld them. To the dawn
    Our poop we turned, and for the witless flight
    Made our oars wings,[44] still gaining on the left.
    Each star of the other pole night now beheld,
    And ours so low, that from the ocean floor
    It rose not. Five times re-illumed, as oft
    Vanished the light from underneath the moon,
    Since the deep way we entered, when from far
    Appeared a mountain dim, loftiest methought
    Of all I e’er beheld. Joy seized us straight;
    But soon to mourning changed. From the new land
    A whirlwind sprung, and at her foremost side
    Did strike the vessel. Thrice it whirled her round
    With all the waves; the fourth time lifted up
    The poop, and sank the prow: so fate decreed:
    And over us the booming billow closed.”
            --Inferno, xxvi. (Cary’s transl.)

Thus also Mr Tennyson--drawing from Dante not less happily than he so
often does from Homer--makes his Ulysses resign the idle sceptre into
the hands of the home-keeping Telemachus, and tempt the seas once more
in quest of new adventures:--

    “There lies the port: the vessel puffs her sail:
     There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners,
     Souls that have toiled, and wrought, and thought with me,
     That ever with a frolic welcome took
     The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
     Free hearts, free foreheads--you and I are old:
     Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;
     Death closes all, but something ere the end,
     Some work of noble note, may yet be done.

            *       *       *       *       *

     ’Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
     Push off, and sitting well in order smite
     The sounding furrows: for my purpose holds
     To sail beyond the sunset and the baths
     Of all the western stars, until I die.
     It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
     It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
     And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.”






CONCLUDING REMARKS.


The resemblance which these Homeric poems bear, in many remarkable
features, to the romances of mediæval chivalry, has been long ago
remarked, and has already been incidentally noticed in these pages. The
peculiar caste of kings and chiefs--or kings and knights, as they are
called in the Arthurian and Carlovingian tales--before whom the
unfortunate “churls” tremble and fly like sheep, is a feature common to
both. “Then were they afraid when they saw a knight”--is the pregnant
sentence which, in Mallory’s ‘King Arthur,’ reveals a whole volume of
social history; for the knight, in the particular instance, was but
riding quietly along, and there ought to have been no reason why the
“churls” should dread the sight of a professed redresser of grievances.
But even so Ulysses condescends to use no argument to this class but the
active use of his staff; and Achilles dreads above all things dying “the
death of a churl” drowned in a brook. It is only the noble, the priest,
and the divine bard who emerge into the light of romance. The lives and
feelings of the mere toilers for bread are held unworthy of the
minstrel’s celebration. Just as in the early romances of Christendom we
do not get much lower in the social scale than the knight and the lady,
the bishop and the wizard, so in these Homeric lays--even in the more
domestic Odyssey, unless we make Eumæus the exception--the tale still
clings to the atmosphere of courts and palaces, and ignores almost
entirely, unless for the purpose of drawing out a simile or
illustration, the life-drama of the great mass of human kind. In both
these cycles of fiction we find represented a state of things--whether
we call it the “heroic age” or the “age of chivalry”--which could hardly
have existed in actual life; and in both the phase of civilisation, and
the magnificence of the properties and the scenery, seem far beyond what
the narrators could have themselves seen and known.

The character of the hero must not be judged by modern canons of
morality. With all the honest purpose and steadfast heart which we
willingly concede to him, we cannot but feel there is a shiftiness in
his proceedings from first to last which scarcely savours of true
heroism. We need not call him, as Thersites does in Shakespeare, “that
dog-fox Ulysses,” nor even go quite so far as to look upon him as what a
modern translator terms him, “the Scapin of epic poetry;” but we see in
him the embodiment of prudence, versatility, and expediency, rather than
of the nobler and less selfish virtues. Ulysses, both in the Iliad and
in the Odyssey, is the diplomatist of his age; and it is neither his
fault nor Homer’s that the diplomacy of that date was less refined, and
less skilful in veiling its coarser features. Even in much later times,
dissimulation has been held an indispensable quality in rulers;[45] and
an English philosopher tells us plainly that “the intriguing spirit, the
overreaching manner, and the over-refinement of art and policy, are
naturally incident to the experienced and thorough politician.”[46] At
the same time, it must be remembered that Ulysses employs deceit only
where it was recognised and allowed by the moral code of the
age--against his enemies; he is never for a moment otherwise than true
to his friends. Nay, while the kings and leaders in the Iliad are too
fairly open to the reproach of holding cheap the lives and the interests
of the meaner multitude who followed them, Ulysses is, throughout his
long wanderings, the sole protecting providence, so far as their
wilfulness will allow him, of his followers as well as of himself.

The tale of his wanderings has been a rich mine of wealth for poets and
romancers, painters and sculptors, from the dim date of the age which we
call Homer’s down to our own. In this wonderful poem, be its authorship
what it may, lie the germs of thousands of the volumes which fill our
modern libraries. Not that all their authors are either wilful
plagiarists or even conscious imitators; but because the Greek poet,
first of all whose thoughts have been preserved to us in writing,
touched, in their deepest as well as their lightest tones, those chords
of human action and passion which find an echo in all hearts and in all
ages.

First, that is to say, of all whose utterances we regard as merely
human. There are, indeed, other recorded utterances to which the song of
Homer, unlike as it is, has yet wonderful points of resemblance. For the
student of Scripture, the prince of heathen poets possesses a special
interest. It is quite unnecessary to insist upon the actual connection
which some enthusiastic champions of sacred literature have either
traced or fancied between the lays of the Greek bard and the inspired
records of the chosen people. Whether the Hebrew chronicles, in any
form, could have reached the eye or ear of the poet in his many
wanderings is, to say the least, extremely doubtful. But Homer bears an
independent witness to the truth and accuracy of the sacred narrative,
so far as its imagery and diction are to be taken into account, which is
very remarkable and valuable. Allowing for the difference in the local
scenery, the reader of the Iliad may well fancy at times that he is
following the night-march of Abraham, the conquests of Joshua, or the
wars of the Kings; while in the Odyssey the same domestic interiors, the
same primitive family life, the same simple patriarchal relations
between the king or chief of the tribe and his people, remind us in
every page of the fresh and living pictures of the book of Genesis.
Fresh and living the portraits still are, in both cases, after the lapse
of so many centuries, because in both the writers drew faithfully from
what was before their eyes, without any straining after effect--without
any betrayal of that self-consciousness which spoils many an author’s
best work, by forcing his own individuality upon the reader instead of
that of the scenes and persons whom he represents. To trace the many
points of resemblance between these two great poems and the sacred
records as fully as they might be traced would require a volume in
itself. It may be enough in these pages shortly to point out some few of
the many instances in which Homer will be found one of the most
interesting, because assuredly one of the most unconscious, commentators
on the Bible.

The Homeric kings, like those of Israel and Judah, lead the battle in
their chariots: Priam sits “in the gate,” like David or Solomon:
Ulysses, when he would assert his royalty, stands by a pillar, as stood
Joash and Josiah. Their riches consist chiefly in “sheep and oxen,
men-servants and maid-servants.” When Ulysses, in the Iliad, finds
Diomed sleeping outside his tent,--“and his comrades lay sleeping around
him, and under their heads they had their shields, and their spears were
fixed in the ground by the butt-end”[47]--we have the picture, almost
word for word, of Saul’s night-bivouac when he was surprised by David:
“And behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in
the ground at his bolster, and the people lay round about him.” Ulysses
and Diomed think it not beneath their dignity, as kings or chiefs, to
act what we should consider the part of a spy, like Gideon in the camp
of the Midianites. Lycurgus the Thracian slays with an ox-goad, like
Shamgar in the Book of Judges. The very cruelties of warfare are the
same--the insults too frequently offered to the dead body of an enemy,
“the children dashed against the stones”--the miserable sight which
Priam foresees in the fall of his city, as Isaiah in the prophetic
burden of Babylon.[48]

The outward tokens of grief are wholly Eastern. Achilles, in the Iliad,
when he hears of the death of his friend Patroclus--Laertes, in the
Odyssey, when he believes his son’s return hopeless--throw dust upon
their heads, like Joshua and the elders of Israel when they hear of the
disaster at Ai. King Priam tears his hair and beard in his vain appeal
to Hector at the Scæan gates, as Ezra does, when he hears of the
trespasses of the Jewish princes.[49] Penelope sits “on the threshold”
to weep, just as Moses “heard the people weeping, every man in the door
of his tent.” “Call for the mourning women,” says the prophet
Jeremiah,[50] “that they may come; and let them make haste, and take up
a wailing for us.” So when the Trojan king bears off his dead son at
last to his own palace, the professional mourners are immediately sent
for--“the bards, to begin the lament.”[51] As Moses carries forth the
bones of Joseph into Canaan, and David gathers carefully those of Saul
and Jonathan from the men of Jabesh-Gilead, so Nestor charges the
Greeks, when they have almost determined to quit Troy in despair, to
carry the bones of their slain comrades home to their native land.
Sarpedon’s body is borne to his native Lycia, there to be honoured “with
a mound and with a column”--as Jacob set up a pillar for his dead
Rachel on the road by Bethlehem. The Philistines, after the battle of
Gilboa, bestow the armour of Saul in the house of their goddess
Ashtaroth: the sword of Goliath is laid up as a trophy with the priest
Ahimelech, “wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod;”[52] even so does
Hector vow to hang up the armour of Menelaus in the temple of Apollo in
Troy.

The more peaceful images have the same remarkable likeness. The fountain
in the island of Ithaca, faced with stone, the work of the forefathers
of the nation, Ithacus and Neritus, recalls that “well of the
oath”--Beer-sheba--which Abraham dug, or that by which the woman of
Samaria sat, known as “the well of our father Jacob.” The stone which
the goddess Minerva upheaves to hurl against Mars, which “men of old had
set to be a boundary of the land”--the two white stones,[53] of unknown
date and history even in the poet’s own day, of which he doubts whether
they be sepulchral or boundary, which Achilles made the turning-point
for the chariot-race,--these cannot fail to remind us of the stones
Bohan and Ebenezer, and of the warning in the Proverbs--“Remove not the
ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set up.” The women grinding at
the mill, the oxen treading out the corn, the measure by cubit, the
changes of raiment, the reverence due to the stranger and to the
poor,--the dowry given by the bridegroom, as by way of purchase, not
received with the bride,--all these are as familiar to us in the books
of Moses as in the poems of Homer. The very figures of speech are the
same. The passionate apostrophe of Moses and Isaiah--“Hear, O heavens,
and give ear, O earth”--is used by Juno in the Iliad, and by Calypso in
the Odyssey.[54] “Day” is commonly employed as an equivalent for fate or
judgment; “the half of one’s kingdom” is held to be a right royal gift;
“the gates of hell” are the culmination of evil. Telemachus swears “by
the woes of his father,” as Jacob does “by the fear of his father
Isaac;” and the curse pronounced on Phœnix by his father--“that never
grandchild of his begetting might sit upon his knees”[55]--recalls the
sacred text in which we are told that “the children of Machir, the son
of Manasseh, were brought up on Joseph’s knees.”

Many and various have been the theories of interpretation which have
been employed, by more or less ingenious writers, to develop what they
have considered the inner meaning of the poet’s tale. Such speculations
began at a very early date in literary history. They were current among
Greek philosophers in the days of Socrates, but he himself would not
admit them. It is impossible, and would be wearisome even if it were
possible, to discuss them all. But one especially must be mentioned, not
wholly modern, but which has won much favour of late in the world of
scholars,--that in both poems we have certain truths of physical and
astronomical science represented under an allegorical form, imported
into Greek fable from Eastern sources. This theory is, to say the least,
so interesting and ingenious, that without presuming here to discuss
its truth, it claims a brief mention. It may be fairest to put it in the
words of one of its most enthusiastic advocates. So far as it applies to
the Odyssey, it stands thus:--

“The Sun [Ulysses] leaves his bride the Twilight [Penelope] in the sky,
where he sinks beneath the sea, to journey in silence and darkness to
the scene of the great fight with the powers of Darkness [the Siege of
Troy]. The ten weary years of the war are the weary hours of the
night.... The victory is won: but the Sun still longs to see again the
beautiful bride from whom he parted yester-eve. Dangers may await him,
but they cannot arrest his steps: things lovely may lavish their beauty
upon him, but they cannot make him forget her.... But he cannot reach
his home until another series of ten long years have come to an end--the
Sun cannot see the Twilight until another day is done.”[56]

So, in the Iliad, as has been already noticed, Paris and the Trojans
represent the powers of Darkness, “who steal away the beautiful Twilight
[Helen] from the western sky;” while Achilles is the Sun, who puts to
rout these forces of the Night.[57]

In contrast, though not necessarily in contradiction, to this physical
allegory, stands the moral interpretation, a favourite one with some of
the mediæval students of Homer, which sees in the Odyssey nothing less
than the pilgrimage of human life--beset with dangers and seductions on
every side, yet blessed with divine guidance, and reaching its goal at
last, through suffering and not without loss. Every point in the
wanderings of the hero has been thus made to teach its parable, more or
less successfully. The different adventures have each had their special
application: Circe represents the especially sensual appetites; the
Lotus-eating is indolence; the Sirens the temptations of the ear; the
forbidden oxen of the Sun the “flesh-pots of Egypt”--the sin of
gluttony. It is at least well worthy of remark how, throughout the whole
narrative, the false rest is brought into contrast with the true. Not in
the placid indolence of the Lotus-eaters, not in the luxurious halls of
Circe or in the grotto of Calypso, nor even in the joyous society of the
Phæacians, but only in the far-off home, the seat of the higher and
better affections, is the pilgrim’s real resting-place. The key-note of
this didactic interpretation, which has an undoubted beauty and pathos
of its own, making the old Greek poet, like the Mosaic law, a
schoolmaster to Christian doctrine, has been well touched by a modern
writer:--

   “O beautiful and strange epitome
    Of this our life, while through the tale we trace
    Homeless Ulysses on the land and sea!
    From childhood to old age it is the face
    Of heaven-lost, yearning man: from place to place
    Whether he wander forth abroad, or knows
    No change but of home-nature and of grace,
    Still is he as one seeking for repose--
    A man of many thoughts, a man of many woes.”[58]

Some of the early religious commentators pushed such interpretations to
extravagance; they dealt with Homer as the extreme patristic school of
theology dealt with the Old Testament: they so busied themselves in
seeking for mystical interpretations in every verse, that they held the
plain and literal meaning of the text as of almost secondary importance.
It was said of one French scholar--D’Aurat--a man of some learning, that
he spent his life in trying to find all the Bible in Homer. Such men saw
Paradise disguised in the gardens of Alcinous; the temptation of the
chaste Bellerophon was but a pagan version of the story of Joseph; the
fall of Troy evidently prefigured, to their fancy, the destruction of
Jerusalem. Some went even further, and turned this tempting weapon of
allegory against their religious opponents: thus Doctor Jacobus Hugo saw
the Lutheran heretics prefigured in the Lotus-eaters of the Odyssey, and
thought that the reckless Antinous was a type of Martin Luther himself.
Those who are content to take Homer as he is, the poet of all ages,
without seeking to set him up either as a prophet or as a moral
philosopher, may take comfort from, the brief criticism of Lord Bacon
upon all over-curious interpretation--“I do rather think the fable was
first, and the exposition devised after.” The most ingenious theories as
to the hidden meaning of the song are at best but the mists which the
Homerists have thrown round their deity--

    “The moony vapour rolling round the king.”

He moves among them all, a dim mysterious figure, but hardly less than
divine.